M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama Review of Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving B. Udugama, Middlesex University, M 00734040 provided with Abstract—Since deep neural networks' resurgence, reinforcement learning has gradually strengthened and surpassed Specific settings wherein the agent & ecosystem has been humans in many conventional games. However, it is not easy to studied, which is significant. In these kinds of situations, copy these accomplishments to autonomous driving because state researchers attempt to overcome a systematic decision-making spaces are immensely complicated in the real world and action framework formulated under the classic Reinforcement spaces are continuous and fine control is necessary. Besides, autonomous driving systems must also maintain their Learning (RL) conditions, where the system is expected to functionality regardless of the environment's complexity. The observe and perceive the ecosystem and, therefore, behave deep reinforcement learning domain (DRL) has become a robust adequately at every moment. Optimum behaviour is attributed learning framework to handle complex policies in high to the policy[3].
dimensional surroundings with deep representation learning. This The principles of reinforcement learning, the classification of research outlines deep, reinforcement learning algorithms (DRL).
tasks where RL is a probable approach, particularly in cruising It presents a nomenclature of autonomous driving in which DRL techniques have been used, thus discussing important strategy, predictive cognition, trajectory and computational issues in evaluating autonomous driving agents in navigation planning, and low-level control system architecture, the real environment. Instead, it involves similar but not standard are discussed in this survey. This analysis also reflects on RL's RL techniques, adjoining fields such as emulation of actions, numerous engagements in the context of autonomous driving modelling imitation, inverse reinforcement learning. The (AD). Ultimately, discuss deploying modern RL techniques simulators' role in training agents is addressed, as are the methods like imitation learning and deep Q learning by showing the for validating, checking and robustness of existing RL solutions.
main constraints and consequences[1].
Index Terms— Autonomous driving, Deep Reinforcement learning, Controller learning, Motion planning, Trajectory The main aspects of this review: optimization • Self-contained RL overview for the automotive sector.
• Comprehensive literature overview about the use of I. INTRODUCTION RL for various automated driving assignments.
F OR a decade, the autonomous car has been in the news and • Analysis of the main problems and prospects for RL continues to dominate auto headlines. Researchers, robotics applying to automated vehicles in the real organizations and the automotive industry have been fascinated environment.
by an autonomous vehicle. Human driving is accident-prone.
The failure of humans to obtain smarter spontaneous driving II. CONSTITUENTS OF AUTONOMOUS DRIVING SYSTEM decisions triggers road collisions, asset loss and fatalities[1].
Fig. 1. contains the specific parts of an AD unit's Motion The autonomous vehicle offers us the capability to restore an planning, showing the flow from the route planning to the selferror-prone human driver by offering reassurance and control actuation. The sensor design involves several sets of protection. Driverless systems consist of various functions at sensors, radars and LIDAR s in a typical autonomous driving the perception level that has now attained high accuracy due to vehicle and a GPS-GNSS system for accurate positioning and deep learning architectures. In addition to perception, DRL inertial measurement units that offer 3 D localization to the autonomous driving technologies have addressed several device[15].
challenges in which conventional supervised learning The purpose of the perception component is to produce an techniques are no longer valid. First, as the estimation of the intermediary level description of the system's status that is then agent's behaviour alters upcoming sensor information gained used by a policymaking technique that will effectively establish from the context where the autonomous agent works, the role the operational policy. This primary condition would consist of of optimum driving speed in a metropolitan setting, for lane placement, drivable region, symbolic location such as example, adjusts. Second, the regulatory factors such as the pedestrians and vehicles, state of others, and traffic lights.
time of collision, the longitudinal deviation w.r.t to the Perception problems spread to the remainder of the optimum route of the autonomous system reflect both the communication chain[6]. Robust technology realization is essential for safety; therefore, redundant options improve dynamics of the agent and environmental ambiguity[2]. Of this confidence in detection. This is accomplished by combining kind, challenges will entail the concept of the stochastic cost multiple vision tasks, including semantic segmentation, motion function to be maximized. This describes a higher feature space M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama complex navigation tasks, outcome-based policy learning for expressways, crossings, mergers and splits, reward learning with converse reinforcement learning from intelligence expert data. Then briefly study the state space, action space and rewards mechanisms in these ecosystems before exploring the DRL frameworks for AD tasks[6].
Implementing adequate state spaces, action spaces, and rewards mechanisms is essential in order to effectively apply Fig. 1. Layers of motion planning for AD systems[5] DRL to automated driving assignments. Frequently utilized state-space characteristics for automated driving include: egoestimation, estimation of depth, identification of soiling, which vehicle location, heading, and velocity, as well as other is typically easily unified directly through a multi-task design.
constraints in the ego-vehicle sensor view spectrum [5]. This is A. Understand the Surrounding further improved by lane details like lane number, route The abstract mid-level representation of the perception state contour, ego-vehicle context and projected trajectory, from the perception module is mapped by this main module on longitudinal data such as time to collision, and ultimately the higher-level intervention or even decision-making module. scenario relevant data such as traffic regulations and locations Abstractly, this specific portion groups three tasks: of the signal( see Fig. 2.).
Comprehension of the scene, decision and even preparation. As seen in figure one module, it is assembled on top of the algorithmic localization or detection tasks to establish a higherlevel understanding of the scene. It attempts to vigorously simplify situations by fusing heterogeneous sensor capital as the information becomes even more abstract[4].
This merger material offers a broad and condensed context for the components of the decision. Fusion provides a sceptical Fig. 2. deep reinforcement learning based autonomous driving[4] sensor image of the eco system and models the sensor noise and even uncertainties of identification across many modalities such as LIDAR, radar, video, ultrasound. This essentially involves IV. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING – MODELING weighting the projections by using a process based on values.
A. Modelling the Autonomous system B. Localization and Mapping A key aspect of the learning experience is modelling the egovehicle movement as it poses the tradeoff question between One of the crucial foundations of autonomous driving is model accuracy and computational capital. Since RL strategies visualization. When an area is surveyed, it is easy to find the use a large number of episodes to evaluate optimum strategy, vehicle's actual location on the map. The first coherent AD the environmental phase time, which strongly depends on the presentations relied largely on localization to pre-mapped areas.
vehicle dynamics model's assessment time, has a profound Conventional mapping techniques are improved by semantic effect on training time. More complex models with a larger object recognition for coherent disambiguation because of the number of parameters and complicated tyre models must be extent of the query. In particular, localized high-definition maps chosen from the simplest kinematic model to more advanced can be seen as a precedent for object detection.
dynamics models[15].
C. Route Planning and policy Special simulators are also used to model traffic and In the AD pipeline, route preparation is a key factor. This surrounding vehicles. Using cellular automation models, some module is required to create motion-level controls that authors build their environments. Some use MOBIL, which is a manoeuvre the car, providing a route-level plan from HD maps general model (minimizing lane shift-induced overall braking) or GPS based maps. to extract discretionary and obligatory lane change laws for a broad class of car-following models; the Intelligent Driving D. Controlling the Autonomous system Model (IDM), a single-lane continuous microscopic model[3].
A controller determines the speed, steering angle and B. Simulation decelerating behaviour expected by a pre-established map such as Google maps over each point in the road or appropriate To gain complete control over the model, some writers build driving recording of the same values at each waypoint. Path self-made environments, although there are commercial and following, by contrast, includes a terrestrial model of the open-source environments that can include this functionality.
automobile's dynamics viewing the waypoints over a given duration in sequence[7].
III. RL FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING TASKS AD tasks where RL could be implemented include optimization of controllers, scheduling of paths and optimization of trajectories, movement planning and dynamic path planning, expansion of high-level driving policies for M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama Any of them used in recent research into motion planning with measuring the current situation, resulting in RL are briefly described in Table 1. considerably faster learning, but the choice of the immediate reward strongly impacts the developed C. Actions Space strategy, which often escapes the strategy.
The choice of action configuration depends highly on the • In predefined times or travel distances[6], or where a vehicle model and task configured for the reinforcement positive or poor decision takes place, an intermediate learning problem. Although it is possible to see two key layers option might be to offer an incentive.
of control: one is the basic control of the car by regulating de E. Observation Space accelerating and accelerating orders, and the other operates on the behavioural layer and determines strategic level decisions, The room for perception explains the universe to the agent.
such as lane shift, lane management, Accurate reference point It needs to have adequate information to choose the required setting, etc. The agent gives an order at this stage to low-level action, so it includes - based on the mission - the following controllers who determine the real trajectory. Just a few papers knowledge: deal with the layer of motion planning, where the mission 1) Vehicle State Observation specifies the endpoints [11]. In comparison, few papers deviate The most widely used and often the easiest observation for from constraints on vehicle motion and produce behaviour by the ego vehicle consists of the unceasing variables of (|e|, v, moving onto a grid, such as in classic microscopic models of Ɵ ) representing the lateral direction from the centre-line of e cellular automatics[3]. the lane, vehicle speed, and yaw angle correspondingly for lane holding, navigation, easy racing, overtaking, or D. Rewarding Functions manoeuvring activities. (see Fig. 3).
The agent attempts to fulfil a mission during preparation, normally containing of more than one move. An episode is called this mission. An episode ends until one of the following criteria is met: • The agent executes the role efficiently.
• A previously specified stage is reached by the episode • A terminating status enhances.
The first two cases are insignificant and rely on the real problem's nature. Terminal cases are usually circumstances in which the agent enters a position from which it is difficult to Fig.3. Basic vehicle state model[1] perform the actual mission, or the agent commits an intolerable error. Vehicle motion preparation agents normally use 2) Environment Observation termination circumstances, such as accident or exiting the track Having knowledge about the vehicle world and representing or lane with other members or barriers, since the episode it to the learning agent reflects a high degree of diversity in eventually concludes with these two. There are lighter ways, the literature. It is possible to observe different degrees of with examples of having too high a tangent angle to the track or sensor abstractions: reaching too close to other people, where the episode terminates • Perception level, where camera images, lidar or with failure before the crash occurs. These "before crash" radar data are transferred to the agent terminations accelerate the training by taking the loss details • The intermediate stage, where idealized knowledge forward in time, while caution is required in their design[15].
about sensors is provided The first significant factor is the pacing of the incentive, • Ground truth stage, where all information that is where the builder of the reinforcement learning approach has to measurable and not detectable is given.
select a combination of both the pros and cons of the following The structure of the sensor model also affects the Deep RL strategies: agent's neural network structure since image-like or array- • Rewarding and discounting it back, which could result like inputs infer 2 D or 1 D CNN structures, whereas a single in a slower learning process while reducing the dense network results in a simple collection of scalar policy's human-driven shaping.
information. There are examples of combining these two • Naturally, the discount often occurs in this approach, providing immediate reward at each stage by M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama TABLE II TABLE III AUTONOMOUS DRIVING TASKS WITH REUQIRED DRL OPTR LOESA ARNND P COOLNICSY O BF EUHSAINVGIO SUIMR ULATION FOR DRL AD Task DRL METHOD & DESCRIPTION IMPROPV r Eo Ms ENTS & TRADEOFFS Cons Lane Keep A DRL method for discrete actions (DQN) and continuous Costs 1. This research concludes th Uant dthere- musoed oefl icnogn tinuous behaviour creates actions (DDAC) using the TORCS simulator is proposed by E nthseu red Ssamfeotyo ther pathways, althoug Dh yitn laemadics st o more restrictive termination authors[2]. Authors[3] are studying discrete and continuous T raining scpoeneddi tions on the negative si Odbe saenrdv altoinonges/r Scoennsvoerr gmeondcee ltsi me to policies to follow the lane and optimise average velocity us Sinimg ple dyunnadmeircssta cnadn. 2 b.e Fhoarn qduleidck er in Mteuglrtaiatigoenn t& b eimhapvrioovuerds efficiency, DQN s and Deep Deterministic Actor Critic (DDAC). eliminating memory replay i n DQN s helps. The one hot action space encoding resulted in sudden power of steering. Although the continuing strategy of DDAC helps smooth the acts and delivers improved results.
Lane Change Authors[15] are using Q-learning to learn a no-operation Compared to conventional approaches, this approach is more stable, guideline for egovehicle, lane shift to left/right, and consists of identifying fixed way points, velocity profiles, and accelerate/decelerate. direction curvature to be taken by the ego car.
Ramp Merging Authors[5] suggest recurrent architectures, namely LSTM s, to To execute the merging more robustly, historical experience of state model long-term dependencies for the merger into a highway knowledge is used.
ramp of ego automobiles.
Intersections To negotiate intersection, authors use DQN to test the Q-value Author-defined Creep-Go behaviour allow the vehicle to more securely for state-action pairs[15],, navigate intersections with small spaces and visibility.
Motion Planning An improved A¤ algorithm is proposed by the authors[88] to Smooth vehicle control behaviour and increased performance compared learn a heuristic function using deep neural networks over to multi-step DQNN image-based obstacle map input.
kinds of inputs. The network thus has to have two distinct types of input layers[3].
V. EVENT-BASED CLASSIFICATION OF THE APPROACHES While machine learning may be assumed to provide an overall end-to-end approach to autonomous driving, the review of recent literature indicates that research on Reinforcement Learning may provide answers to some sub-tasks of this problem. The articles can be structured around these problems in recent years, where a well-dedicated condition or case is selected and investigated whether it can be overcome by a selflearning agent[5].
A. Following a car The simplest challenge in this survey is to follow vehicles, Fig.4. Ramp merge: (a) simulated scenario and (b) real-world location[3] where the question is articulated as follows: There are two simplest method, the longitudinal regulation where the agent simulation participants, a leading vehicle and the following approaches this position is available for learning, as can be seen vehicle, each retaining their side positions in a lane, and the in—other papers, such as using complete power of steering and following vehicle changes its longitudinal velocity to ensure a acceleration. The linear acceleration of the car accelerates and safe subsequent distance. The space out of observation consists decelerates in the acts, and the ego vehicle keeps its lane when of the tuple (v, dv, ds), representing agent velocity, lead performing these actions. The "lane change left" and "lane velocity difference, and distance of headway[4].
change right" behaviour indicate lateral motion[2].
B. Lane following D. Driving in Stream Of Traffic Lane-keeping or following the trajectory is still a basic In recent articles, the most complex situation discussed is control task, but this concern focuses on lateral control, as where the autonomous agent is driving in traffic. Naturally, the opposed to car follow-up. There are two distinct approaches to topology of the network, the quantity and behaviour of the the observation room in these studies: One is the lateral adjacent vehicles, the operation of traffic laws, and many other direction and angle of the vehicle in the road, "ground truth," features also make this role scalable. In the previous pages, such while the second is a front camera view. Naturally, the agents as lane-keeping, or car trailing, sub-tasks of this scenario have use external simulators, TORCS, and GAZEBO/ROS in these been examined[8].
instances for image-based control. The gap from the centerline of the lane is almost often regarded by incentive programmes as an instant reward. It is important to remember that these VI. C ONCLUSIONS agents barely consider the dynamics of the vehicle and, oddly, In real-world autonomous driving systems, reinforcement do not rely on collective longitudinal regulation[15]. learning is still an active and emerging field. While a few commercial implementations are successful, relatively little C. Ramp Merging literature or large-scale public databases are available.
The ramp merge dilemma deals with the highway on-ramp Therefore, we were inspired to formalize and coordinate RL situation, where the ego vehicle has to locate the necessary autonomous driving implementations. Interacting agents are distance to get on the highway between two vehicles. In the interested in autonomous driving situations that need M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama negotiation and complex decision making that fits RL. fully unintended discovery techniques spend a lot of time However, in order to provide advanced ideas that we address investigating the meaningless areas of the underlying state in-depth, there are more problems to be overcome. Detailed space, which is particularly important in broad and continuous theoretical reinforcement learning is discussed in this work. state spaces. Two key directions are available. Through Latest advances in the area have demonstrated that numerous applying external intelligence, one guides the discovery deep reinforcement learning methods can be successfully used process, while the other uses risk assessment. Through for various stages of motion planning problems for autonomous demonstrating the fascinating or dangerous sections of state vehicles, but several questions remain unanswered. The key space, the demonstrator may also lead the exploration online.
benefit of these approaches is that unstructured data such as raw And, ultimately, a supervisory control system will follow or slightly pre-processed radar or camera-based image challenging constraints.
information can be treated. Overall, a dynamically changing field is the principle of The comparatively low computational criteria of the trained stable RL. The subject's importance is unquestionable from the network are one of the key advantages of using deep neural point of view of vehicle regulation, not only for safety but also networks trained by a reinforcement learning agent in motion for the reduction of the state and the room for intervention. The planning. While this method requires a large number of trials in preference of troublesome, so-called corner cases from a large the learning phase to obtain adequate knowledge, as stated range of unrelated conditions is one of the major problems with before, for basic problems of convex optimization, the preparation and validation.
mechanism converges easily. However, the preparation can rapidly hit millions of measures with complicated situations, In general, three paths to narrowing the gap exist: meaning only one setup of hyperparameters or incentive • Identification of the system, aiming to adapt the hypothesis can last hours or even days. simulation to reality.
Since complex reinforcement learning tasks involve ongoing • Domain adaptation helps to learn a well model from a iteration on the design of the environment, network source distribution of data on a separate target data configuration, incentive scheme, or even the algorithm itself, it distribution.
is a time-consuming activity to design such a method. The • Randomization of the domain targeted learning in a measurement time depends heavily on the delegated computing very randomized environment that covers the target resources and the required outcome interpretation and and makes the agent resilient.
inference. On this basis, it is not shocking that most articles nowadays deal with small subtasks of motion planning, and the The tradeoff between the completely modelled system and most complicated situations can not be found in the literature, feasibility was discussed, so identifying the system is not such as travelling in urban traffic. RL itself, like many defined here. One aims to locate the transition strategy between heuristics, has a tradeoff between efficiency and the need for the virtual and the actual representations during Domain capital.
adaptation. As an example, this transition can be solved by a semantically segmented image for image sequences taken from The principal purpose of reinforcement learning is to a front-facing camera. In [2], the two realms meet at the statistically optimize the long-term incentive. Nevertheless, the segmented stage in the centre, while in [1], the authors attempt main priority is the avoidance of injuries for vehicle control to build "realistic" training images using generative adversarial activities. Although the use of behaviour that triggers networks (GAN) [7].
significant negative rewards does not inherently eliminate RL, Overall, many problems in this area remain to be addressed, other strategies must control the hazards. In several ways, the such as environmental detail and sensor simulation, literature discusses protection and threats, for which[4] offers computational specifications, transferability to actual systems, an exemplary overview. In this field, two principal directions robustness, and agent validation. Due to these concerns, it can can be separated. The approaches using the optimization criteria be claimed that reinforcement learning is not an adequate are included in one group of solutions, while the other group method for automotive motion planning. However, when includes algorithms that change the discovery process. One has combined with other approaches, it can be very useful in some choices for adjusting optimization parameters as well.
solving complex optimization challenges.
The worst-case criterion is the first. Addressing the worst-case situations solves the concerns created by the uncertainty REFERENCES resulting from the stochastic instability of the system and the [1] A.-E. Sallab, M. Abdou, E. Perot, and S. Yogamani, "Deep parameter uncertainties. The risk-sensitive criteria are the reinforcement learning framework for autonomous driving," second choice. In this circumstance, a scalar parameter, a so- Electronic Imaging, vol. 2017, no. 19, pp. 70–76, 2017.
called risk susceptibility parameter, is applied to the loss [2] V. Talpaert., I. Sobh., B. R. Kiran., P. Mannion., S. Yogamani., A.
El-Sallab., and P. Perez., "Exploring applications of deep function to control the degree of risk. Finally, it is possible to reinforcement learning for real-world autonomous driving systems," use a restricted Markov decision process (MDP), where the in Proceedings of the 14 th International Joint Conference on default MDP tuple is expanded with a constraint set that must Computer Vision, Imaging and Computer Graphics Theory and be satisfied by the policy function. Applications - Volume 5 VISAPP: VISAPP,, INSTICC. Sci Te Press, 2019, pp. 564–572.
Contrary to the classic exploration approach, changing the [3] K. El Madawi, H. Rashed, A. El Sallab, O. Nasr, H. Kamel, and S.
exploration phase is an alternative, which means that the agent Yogamani, "Rgb and lidar fusion based 3 d semantic segmentation knows something from scratch. That also leads to disastrous for autonomous driving," in 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation situations with vehicle control applications. In comparison, Systems Conference (ITSC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 7–12.
M 00734040 Bavantha Udugama [4] M. Siam, S. Elkerdawy, M. Jagersand, and S. Yogamani, “Deep semantic segmentation for automated driving: Taxonomy, roadmap and challenges," in 2017 IEEE 20 th international conference on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[5] S. Kuutti, R. Bowden, Y. Jin, P. Barber, and S. Fallah, "A survey of deep learning applications to autonomous vehicle control," IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2020.
[6] D. Isele, R. Rahimi, A. Cosgun, K. Subramanian, and K. Fujimura, "Navigating occluded intersections with autonomous vehicles using deep reinforcement learning," in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2018, pp.
2034–2039.
[7] M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp, P.
Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang et al., "End to end learning for self-driving cars," in NIPS 2016 Deep Learning Symposium, 2016.
[8] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, "CARLA: An open urban driving simulator," in Proceedings of the 1 st Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[9] B. Wymann, E. Espié, C. Guionneau, C. Dimitrakakis, R. Coulom, and A. Sumner, "Torcs, the open racing car simulator," Software available at http://torcs. sourceforge. net, vol. 4, 2000.
[10] S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, "Airsim: High-fidelity visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles," in Field and Service Robotics. Springer, 2018, pp. 621–635.
[11] N. Koenig and A. Howard, "Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open-source multi-robot simulator," in 2004 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), vol. 3. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2149–2154.
[12] ] P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, Y.-P.
Flötteröd, R. Hilbrich, L. Lücken, J. Rummel, P. Wagner, and E.
Wießner, “Microscopic traffic simulation using sumo,” in The 21 st IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems. IEEE, 2018. 12 [13] C. Quiter and M. Ernst, “deepdrive/deepdrive: 2.0,” Mar. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1248998 [14] Nvidia, “Drive Constellation now available,” https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2019/03/18/drive-constellation-nowavailable/, 2019, [accessed 24-Feb-2021].
[15] P. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, and A. de La Fortelle, "A reinforcement learning based approach for automated lane change maneuvers," in 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). IEEE, 2018, pp.
1379–1384.