OHMF: A Query Based Optimal Healthcare Medication Framework Santosh Kumar Majhi 1, Padmalochan Bera 1 1 School of Electrical Sciences Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar, 751013 INDIA Email: {sm 20, plb}@iitbbs.ac.in Abstract- Today, cloud computing infrastructure is largely being Cloud computing [7] [8] provides efficient and cost-effective deployed in healthcare to access various healthcare services easily way of delivering IT services which can directly support the over the Internet on an as-needed basis. The main advantage of need to slow the growth of healthcare costs. The agility healthcare cloud is that it can be used as a tool for patients, provided by on-demand, flexible cloud-based computing medical professionals and insurance providers, to query and coresources can also help empower the growth of a new ordinate among medical departments, organizations and other generation of healthcare services and initiatives that respond healthcare related hubs. Although healthcare cloud services can more quickly and creatively to the needs of people and enable better medication process with high responsiveness, but, organizations across the continuum of health. Many healthcare the privacy and other requirements of the patients need to be ensured in the process. Patients’ medical data may be required providers and insurance companies today have adopted some by the medical professionals, hospitals, diagnostic centers for form of electronic medical record systems, though most of analysis and diagnosis. However, data privacy and service quality them store electronic health record (EHR) [4] of patients in cannot be compromised. In other words, there may exist various centralized databases. Typically, a patient may have many service providers corresponding to a specific healthcare service.
healthcare providers, including primary care physicians, The main challenge is to find the appropriate providers that specialists, therapists, and other medical practitioners. In comply best with patients’ requirement.
addition, a patient may use multiple healthcare insurance companies for different types of insurances, such as medical, In this paper, we propose a query based optimal medication dental, vision, and so forth.
framework to support the patients’ healthcare service accessibility comprehensively with considerable response time.
The framework accepts related healthcare queries in natural While cloud computing promises significant benefits, language through a comprehensive user-interface and then legitimate security and compliance concerns [9] have slowed processes the input query through a first-order logic based cloud implementation within the healthcare domain, evaluation engine and finds all possible services satisfying the particularly due to multiple layers of statutory and regulatory requirements. First order logic is used for modeling of user requirements that govern the handling of protected health requirements and queries. The query evaluation engine is built information. With the widespread use of electronic health using z Chaff, a Boolean logic satisfiability solver. The efficacy record (EHR) [4], building a secure EHR sharing environment and usability of the framework is evaluated with initial case studies on synthetic and real life healthcare cloud.
has attracted a lot of attention in both healthcare industry and academic community.
Keywords— Cloud healthcare, First-order logic, z Chaff SAT One unique concept in healthcare clouds is “patient-centric” I. INTRODUCTION view [10], which is a term used mostly in community healthcare systems. Community healthcare system [10] offers Cloud Computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, an open platform for patient to collect, store, use, and share convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of health information in a controlled manner with ubiquitous configurable computing resources (e.g. networks, servers, accessibility. It also offers secure storage and management of storage, applications and services) that can be rapidly patients’ EHR s for multiple applications (e. g. disease provisioned and released with minimal management effort or treatment, lab research, insurance, and other social-networking service provider interaction. Recent Research by Gartner [1], applications). Most of the community healthcare cloud service on top 10 “disruptive technologies,” outlined that enterprise models, such as Microsoft Health Vault [11] and Google cloud [2], power grids [3], web ecosystems, virtualization and Health [12], adopt a centralized architecture with patientsocial software are the dominant but threat-prone technologies centric views. By patient-centric, it means that the information which are being adopted largely in different countries.
stored in the community EHR system is imported by patients and only can be made available to a variety of applications Today, healthcare is undergoing enormous change and reform under the control of patients.
worldwide. With healthcare spending as a percentage of GDP rising by double digits annually in some countries [4] [5] [6], Research on the various security issues surrounding healthcare and concerns growing over medical care access and quality, information systems has been heated over the last few years.
governments and healthcare institutions are working to find The common security issues shared by healthcare cloud creative new ways to address the need for improved care applications are ownership of information, authenticity, delivery models and payment reform.
authentication, non-repudiation, patient consent and authorization, integrity and confidentiality of data. ISO/TS 18308 standard gives the definitions of security and privacy issue for EHR [4]. The Working Group 4 of International single unit. HCX allows adaptors and bridges to be created for Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) was set up to existing EHR systems and repositories so that records can be investigate the issues of data protection and security within the exchanged through a standard interface and CCR record healthcare environment. Its work to date has mainly format. This is accomplished by building DOSG i based concentrated on security in EHR networked systems and services and consumers made scalable through the cloud [15].
common security solutions for communicating patient data [13]. The European AIM/SEISMED (Advanced Informatics in Ming Li et.al has presented the design and implementation of Medicine/Secure Environment for Information Systems in Personal Health Records and provided security to them while Medicine) project is initiated to address a wide spectrum of they are stored at third party such as cloud. This web based security issues within healthcare and provides practical application that allows people to access and co-ordinate their guidelines for secure healthcare establishment [14]. lifelong health information. The patients have control over access to their own PHR. The framework addresses the unique Across the life cycle of healthcare cloud service, a service can challenges brought by multiple PHR owners and users, they be provided through a chain of service providers. When a user have reduced the complexity of key management [16].
starts searching for a specific service, he/she may find a large number of potential service providers. Therefore, the most Leslie S. Liu et. al used a multi-method approach to evaluate challenging problem in cloud service provisioning is to find PHR systems[17]. They have conducted various interview service providers that ensure the user’s data is handled as with potential end users like clinicians and patients and agreed by the participating parties complying with their conducted evaluations with patients and caregivers as well as a requirements. This is especially critical among the dynamic heuristic evaluation with HCI experts. They focused on three environment of the cloud. In the context of the Optimized PHR systems: Google Health, Microsoft Health Vault, and health care framework has been given much emphasis leading World Med Card. The results show that both usability concerns to the development of significant number cloud interactive and socio-cultural influences are barriers to PHR adoption and systems. use. They have presented those results as well as reflect on how both PHR designers and developers might address these In this paper, we present a query based optimal medication issues now and throughout the design cycle.
framework to support the patients’ healthcare service accessibility comprehensively with considerable response Vassiliki Koufi et. al discussed the development of a PHR time. based EMS in a cloud computing environment. Cloud-based services can prove important in emergency care delivery since This paper is organized is as follows. Section I describes the they can enable easy and immediate access to patient data basics of cloud computing and its application in healthcare from anywhere and via almost any device[18].
services. The related study on different healthcare cloud DICOM-based system is based on Digital Imaging and systems have been presented in section II. Section III Communications in Medicine to deal with the high volume of describes the problem with a motivating example. In section medical images and diagnostic imaging procedure [19].
IV, we present our proposed query based optimal healthcare DICOM server, Web User Interface, and DICOM file indexer framework for supporting the patients’ healthcare service are major components of DICOM. User can upload, search accessibility. Section V presents the evaluation of framework and browse images via the Web User Interface. The DICOM with some case studies. Finally, we conclude with scope of file indexer parses the header of DICOM files as they are future work in section VI.
uploaded from the client through the DICOM server or Web User Interface. The DICOM system design includes a portable application program interface layer which enables this open II. RELATED WORK source service to be ported to different cloud platforms. It was A significant number of works have been initiated on tested with various public domain images. This prototype’s healthcare cloud service management. Sabah Mohammed and system design and implementation shows the feasibility of et.al has discussed a distributed Web interactive system for using cloud computing to provide a long term offsite medical sharing health records on the cloud using distributed OSG i image archive solution. In the future work, the authors plan to services and consumers. This system(HCX (Health Cloud implement more security using Internet protocol filtering and e Xchange)) allows for different health record and related also evaluate complete compliance of Health Insurance healthcare services to be dynamically discovered and Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
interactively used by client programs running within a private cloud. A basic prototype was represented as the proof of Health ATM kiosks are developed for patients to manage their concept along with a description to the steps and processes own personal health data [20]. It integrates services from involved in setting up the underlying infrastructure. They Google’s cloud computing environment. It provides timely showed how to build and integrate a composite application access to relevant health data to patients and strengthens using the Eucalyptus and Apache CXF DOSG i open source patients’ communication with their care providers. Individuals frameworks for sharing CCR EHR records. The developed can review personal account information and perform HCX prototype comprising of composite modules (distributed transactions to manage their care online. This functionality is across the cloud) and can be integrated and function as a particularly helpful for patients with chronic conditions who need to monitor their health on a daily basis. They mainly healthcare environments of the future by evolving toward the serve non-native English speakers, undocumented individuals, cloud [21][22].
displaced individuals, elderly persons, migrant farm workers and homeless individuals. It is also a cost effective solution of From the above literature study, we found that there is no personal healthcare management. A Health ATM kiosk makes considerable attempt made in integrating various healthcare use of cloud computing architectures, both vertically and service providers and in providing comprehensive systems for horizontally. Horizontally, it can connect and integrate the patients’ to access and evaluate those service providers multiple clouds to function as one logical cloud; while based on their requirements. In this paper, we propose a query vertically, it can improve capacity of a cloud by enhancing based optimal medication framework to support the patients’ individual existing nodes in the cloud. Currently, the systems healthcare service accessibility comprehensively with cannot be directly handed over to patients. In order for Health considerable response time.
ATM kiosks to be more effective, constant training, outreach, education and collaboration are must. A further plan is to incorporate feeds from different health-related services in order to include data available from pharmacies. III. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE In this section, we demonstrate the problem with a motivating The scenario in which patients and health care providers log example.
into the front-end of a web services to give input all of patient's information, including medications, allergies, laboratory results, medical images and so on, from wherever that patient has received medical care might be envisioned for Figure 1. A simple Service Chain for the given example Across the life cycle of healthcare cloud service, a service can is very obvious that the service S is served as a chain of be provided through a chain of service providers. In such service providers [S 1, S 2] (hospitals), [S 3, S 4] (diagnostic scenario, the most important question is: “how can an user centers), and S 5 (enrolled insurance organization) and S 6 find the service providers that comply with his/her (floating insurance organization). The patient can enroll with requirements in terms of service quality and privacy?” the floating insurance organizations only if the corresponding hospital is tied-up with that insurance organization, may Let us consider that a user requests service S for admitting a involve many more. Now, the privacy, data access and service patient in hospital for preventive medication. Now, the related constraints can be stated as follows: selection of hospitals depends on satisfaction of patient’s privacy and other service requirements. A hospital may deploy (i) The hospitals must maintain the privacy of the patient to doctors for specific medication process. It may also require protect the specified records. While, transferring data specific tests to be done through other diagnostic centers. The electronically, hospital should have appropriate mechanism to related insurance claims are processed by various agencies. It encrypt the records and data should be transferred trough secured tunnel. Electronic transfer of the prescribed medicine (i) User Interface information and test records is not allowed to insurance (ii) Query translation and Evaluation Engine organizations. A hard copy of such documents with authorized (iii) Back end healthcare cloud (database + networks) signature may be allowed. (ii) The hospitals should be well equipped with related medical facilities and quality doctors (i) User Interface (may be a specific list given by the patient). The hospital should have intensive care unit facility with high-end medical The proposed framework provides a comprehensive user instruments. interface through which user can place related queries with necessary requirements and get the response after evaluation (iii) Diagnostic Centers can only view specific details of a of the query. For the purpose of evaluation of queries, the patient required for the related tests but not about the actual interface provides convenient connectivity to the Query disease and patients other details. This requirement can be Evaluation Engine and backend healthcare cloud. The GUI has fine-grained based on the patients need. Such as, the specialist two major components (i) User Validation Module (ii) Query doctor in the diagnostic center may look at some history of Specification and Response Module.
patient for emergency assessment however the attendants or report generating people should not able to access those The user validation module checks the user credentials using information. In addition, the people in the diagnostic center simple authentication scheme. It essentially checks the login who are socially connected with the referring doctor should be password and the role of the user to validate his/her credential.
prevented from accessing the records. On the other hand, the query specification and response module allows the authenticated users to place their query in (iii) Insurance organization may need to look at the records of natural language with specific syntax and semantics. The the medicines prescribed by the doctors and tests done for syntax of query essentially consists various attributes of assessing the bill (as per the insurance policy). However, the healthcare services such as patient centered, clinical reports and final discharge details shouldn’t be disclosed to excellence, connection with trusted insurance policies, cost of them. medication, etc. The user can comprehensively specify their In this scenario, the major challenge is to find the appropriate query as per the requirements. It is to be noted that our query service providers that satisfy the patient’s requirements. The specification module provides various tabs/interface icons to complexity of this problem increases with dependency select corresponding attribute values. Figure 2 shows a generic between the heterogeneous service providers with their view of the interface with various attributes. A query follows policies and implementations. In summary, various cloud very simple semantics which expresses it as an expression. An based medical applications and systems are studied. It has expression can be conjunction (logical AND) of mandatory been observed from the related study and motivating example, attribute fields connected with disjunction (logical OR) of that various healthcare systems are being developed with two optional attribute fields and negation of except attribute major objectives (i) to improve the overall medication process (logical NOT) fields. Each attribute can be also expressed as from the perspective of patients, doctors and hospital networks an expression. Mandatory, optional and except attribute set (ii) to assist patients in managing their own care effectively may vary from user to user depending on their requirements.
especially in emergency situations. To the best of our The simple grammar corresponding to a query is represented knowledge, there exists a few cloud supported systems that as follows: provide information sharing between hospitals to guide the G (L):  E  ,  ,,,(,), A ,  ,P,E  i medication process. Also there is no such tool exist for Where, P indicates the set of production rules as follows: extracting information regarding various features of hospitals and insurance providers that satisfy patients’ requirements.
    E  E  E / E  E / E /E This motivates us to propose a query based optimal healthcare framework for supporting the patients’ healthcare service E  A / A /.../ A accessibility comprehensively with considerable response 1 2 i An example of a query is presented as follows: time.
Example: Find the list of hospitals which provides 100% IV. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK patient centered (A ) service with specified clinical excellence 1 (A ) and 60% coverage by insurance policy (A ); whereas 2 3 In this section, we describe our proposed query based optimal there is no constraint on the expenses (A ) of the overall 4 healthcare service framework. It allows automated searching medication process.
of various medical information in a large hybrid health care This query can be mapped to the following reduced grammar cloud from different service providers. This will in turn guide corresponding to the earlier representation.
the patients to take necessary and optimal decisions related to   E  E  E /E the specific healthcare service at any point of time. The framework is built on top of a formal query evaluation engine E  A / A / A / A 1 2 3 4 with trusted backend healthcare cloud. It has the following The actual expression for the above query can be represented three major components:   as follows: E  A  A  A A 1 2 3 4 For the purpose of inputting queries and observing the reports to the users. The user requirements will be captured responses, the GUI also includes of a query specification and and stored in a file. The stored query(in a file) will be response module. communicated to the Query translation and Evaluation engine module.
Query Specification and Response Module: This module accepts the user specified queries and provides response of the queries according to the specified syntax and semantics. Our interface provides a split screen where the first split is used for specifying the query and second split is used for showing the response of the query. The query specification module detects the syntactic and semantic errors (if any) in the query and Figure 2. Comprehensive User Interface conjunctive normal form (CNF) to comply with the SAT (ii) Query translation and Evaluation Engine solver. An example of a first order logic query is shown as follows: The stored query given by the query specification module will List the hospitals with high quality care (R ) or patient 1 be translated to first order logic based expression and centered (R ), low cost(R ) and not tied up with good 2 3 evaluated by the SAT solver supported engine. Then, this insurance agency(R ).
4 module will interact with the backend healthcare database to check the satisfiability of the query with respect to the The argument will be written as  R  R   R   R  1 2 3 4 information stored in the database. For this evaluation, an image of the database will be derived in first order logic Boolean function. Finally, the results will be presented to the users based on the evaluation. The components of this module The 3-SAT algorithms are used to convert the translated stored are (i) Query Translation (ii)SAT Solver (iii) Response query to CNF form. Now the query will be mapped to CNF by Engine.
using 3-SAT algorithm. The form of the query will be as follows: Query Translation: m n This module converts the stored queries into first order logic   P   X and Q   P query. The first order logic query is essentially represented in ri m ri i1 i1 This CNF form is used to do computation with SAT Solver.
We can write the user query is the function of user Now the evaluation engine checks the satisfiability of the requirements. So, Q: f  a ,a ,a ,...  translated query Q with the cloud models. So, Q → M 1 2 3 represents the cloud model corresponding to user query.
Sometimes the particular user query does not satisfy or SAT Solver: This module represents the image of the backend mapped to the exact available cloud models. In that case, if we cloud into first order logic function. Here the database is a change some requirements partially, it will give some result.
function of various user requirements(i.e., attributes) stored The SAT solver will give the possible traces of solution as per with the backend server. We refer to the corresponding first the requirement. Then the result trace will be foreword to order logic database cloud model as M .
c Response Engine.
  M  f a ,a ,a ,...
c 1 2 3 Figure 3. Architecture of the proposed optimal medication system Response Engine: The output result will be translated into translation of queries into corresponding SAT clauses is natural languages and the response engine will communicate it implemented using 3-SAT algorithm [24]. The framework is to the GUI. evaluated with few synthetic set of patient requirements under a specified healthcare cloud infrastructure. The case study (iii)Back end healthcare cloud considers the patient requirements as referred in Table 1. We have analyzed the results of the query evaluation engine in This module consists of different kind of clouds, which can be form of SAT instances. It has been observed that the query hospital clouds, insurance providers cloud, health care testing results are correct with respect to the healthcare cloud clouds and other computing resources. The role of this layer database.
to interconnect various networks of private hospital clouds, different insurance provider public or private clouds and Sl.No. Requirements attributes Notation medical diagnosis testing clouds. The above clouds are may 1 High quality care R 1 interconnected via public cloud and/or internet. In each of the 2 Patient centered R 2 above clouds includes boarder routers, core switching 3 Minimum length of stay at hospital R 3 configuration, VLAN s, Firewall, Load balancing, Reporting 4 Less statistics of readmission R 4 and configuration databases, Cloud servers, Configurable 5 Adequate staff as per the need R 5 CPU,RAM and Storage, Cloud files and cloud based storage.
6 Low cost R 6 It aims to provide enormous computing power.
7 Available Medical Services R 7 8 Reputed Physician R 8 9 Clinical Standards R 9 V. EVALUATION WITH CASE STUDY 10 Use of Modern IT tool R 10 11 Tied up with good Insurance Agency R 11 The initial version of the framework is developed using PHP 12 Better Treatment Plan R 12 and My SQL server(XAMP) database. The query evaluation Table 1. List of Requirement attributes engine is built on top of z Chaff Boolean SAT solver [23]. The turn guide the patients to take necessary and optimal decisions The efficacy of the query evaluation engine is studied with related to the specific healthcare service at any point of time.
respect to SAT translation/modeling time and SAT solver run The framework may facilitate the service providers to design a time with varying query and database size. Query and scalable and efficient patient interaction system to choose the database size indicates the cumulative sum of the associated services as per their requirements. The major process elements range of values to each different attribute. For example, if of the proposed framework are as follows: there are 5 different attributes, e.g., a , a , a , a and a with  The user validation and requirement gathering has 1 2 3 4 5 their value ranges (1-100), the query size will be 500. been done through a simple and comprehensive user However, in reality these ranges are heterogeneous. The SAT interactive interface.
translation time includes translation of database and the query  Query Translation module translates the user into Boolean models. For example, the attribute a can be specified requirements into first order logic query. It 1 reduced into 7 Boolean variables b , b , b , b , b , b , b , and is represented in Boolean conjunctive normal form 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 b . Thus, the requirement with attribute a is represented as a (CNF).
7 1 Boolean clause, f(b , b , .. b ). A complete query is reduced  The SAT solver checks the satisfiability of the 0 1 7   into Boolean function f a ,a ,...,a . In our evaluation, translated query with the healthcare cloud backend a 0 1 n database. For this, a Boolean model is extracted from the query size is varied from 100 to 5000. The results are the database.
shown in Table 2 which highlights the query size, SAT  The SAT solver provides the possible traces of translation time and SAT run time. It has been observed that solution that satisfies the requirement. Then the result the SAT translation time is linearly dependent on the size of trace is provided as output through the Response the queries whereas the SAT run time almost remains Engine.
constant. This is because of the fact that the SAT translation  The output is translated into natural language forms time involves deriving Boolean clauses corresponding to the and the response engine communicates the same to query and the complexity of the query depends on the number the GUI.
of reduced Boolean variables. The number of reduced Boolean The query evaluation engine is developed using z Chaff SAT variables is linearly dependent on the query size. On the other solver. The efficacy of the framework has been demonstrated hand, SAT run time almost remains constant because the through a case study. The proposed methodology has been z Chaff SAT solver internally use guided search technique shown to be correct and scalable. In future, the framework will called Chaff [25] for finding solutions. It depends on the be validated with various real life case studies. This work can complexity and dependency between the Boolean clauses.
be extended to develop an integrated patient interaction This shows the power of the SAT solvers in solving Boolean system tool for systematic retrieval of healthcare information.
formulae. Therefore, our framework is able to find the query result in considerably good time. It takes 14.91 msec to process a query with size 5000. At present, the translation of SAT results into natural language output is performed REFERENCES manually. [1] P. Kacsuk, Editorial Journal of Grid Computing, 10723, 2004.
[2] J. Hasier and M. Nicolett, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Query Size SAT translation SAT solver Computing, Gartner Research, June 2008, Gartner Inc.
time (msec) run time (msec) [3] M. Ashiqur Rahaman, Padmalochan Bera and E. Al-Shaer.
Smart Analyzer: A noninvasive security threat analyzer for AMI smart 200 8.23 1.2 grid. 31 st IEEE INFOCOM 2012, pp. 2255-2263, Orlando, Florida 350 8.89 1.2 USA, March 2012.
1000 9.32 1.25 1500 10.12 1.26 [4] Hillestad, R., Bigelow, J., Bower, A., Girosi, F., Meili, R., Scoville, R.
and Taylor, R. (2005)‘Can electronic medical record systems transform 2300 11.25 1.29 health care? Potential health benefits,savings, and costs’, Health Affairs, 3000 11.98 1.31 Vol. 24, No. 5, pp.1103–1117.
3500 12.37 1.32 4000 12.89 1.33 [5] Bartels, A. (2006) ‘US IT spending benchmarks for 2006: How to turn the CIO’s bane into aneffective tool for IT budgeting’, Forrester 5000 13.56 1.35 Research Report, www.forester.com Table 2. Results on query evaluation time [6] Hasan, R. and Yurcik, W. (2006) ‘A statistical analysis of disclosed storage security breaches’,Proceedings of 2 nd ACM Workshop on Storage Security and Survivability, Alexandria, VA,pp.1–8.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [7] N Khan, A. Noraziah, T. Herawan,E.Ismail and Z. Inayat, "Cloud Computing: Architecture for efficient provision of services" in procedings of 15 th International Conference on Network-Based This paper presents a comprehensive query based optimal Information Systems, 2012 healthcare service framework that can be targeted to automate the searching of various medical information in a large hybrid [8] Shirley Radack,"Cloud computing: a review of features, benefits, and risks, and recommendations for secure, efficient implementations", ITL healthcare cloud from different service providers. This will in bulletin for June 2012 [9] Abraham, C., Watson, R.T. and Boudreau, M.C. (2008) Proceedings of the 38 th annual Design Automation onference, pp 530- ‘Ubiquitous access: on the front linesof patient care and safety’, 535 , New York, NY, USA,2001.
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 51, No. 6, pp.95–99.
[10] Kilo, C.M. and Wasson, J.H. (2010) Practice Redesign and the Patient Centered Medical Home: History, Promises and Challenges. Health Affairs (Vol. 29, No. 5).
[11] Microsoft Health Vault,Connected Continuous Care,White Paper,March 2011 [12] M.Mohebbi, Dan Vanderkam, J. Kodysh,R. Schonberger, H.Choi & Sanjiv Kumar, “Google Correlate Whitepaper”, June 9, 2011 [13] H.Park, "Report of the for working groups and special interest groups",IMIA Board Meeting,April 21, 2013 [14] The S. M. Furnell, P.W. Sanders, Security management in the healthcare environment, in: R.A. Greenes, H.E. Peterson, D.J. Protti, (eds.),MEDINFO ’95, Proceedings of the eighth World Congress on Medical Informatics. Canada. p. 675–678.
[15] Sabah Mohammed, Daniel Servos and Jinan Fiaidhi, ' HCX: A Distributed OSG i Based Web Interaction System for Sharing Health Records in the Cloud, 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology.
[16] M. Li, S. Yu, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Securing personal health records in cloud computing: Patient-centric and fine-grained data access control in multi-owner settings,” in Secure Comm 10, Sept.2010, pp. 89–106.I. S.
Jacobs and C. P. Bean, “Fine particles, thin films and exchange anisotropy,” in Magnetism, vol. III, G. T. Rado and H. Suhl, Eds. New York: Academic, 1963, pp. 271-350.
[17] Leslie S. Liu, Patrick C. Shih, Gillian R. Hayes, 'Barriers to the doption and Use of Personal Health Record Systems', ACM i Conference 2011, February 8–11, 2011, Seattle, WA, USA [18] V. Koufi and et.al., "Ubiquitous access to cloud emergency medical services," in the proceedings of 10 th IEEE International Conference on Information Technology and Applications in Biomedicine (ITAB), Corfu, Greece, Nov. 2010, pp.1-4.
[19] Chia-Chi Teng and et.al., "A medical image archive solution in the cloud," in the proceedings of 2010 IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering and Service Sciences (ICSESS), Beijing, China, July 2010 , pp.431-434.
[20] N. Botts and et.al, "Cloud Computing Architectures for the Underserved: Public Health Cyber infrastructures through a Network of Health ATM s," in the proceedings of 43 rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Hawaii, USA, Jan. 2010, pp.1-10.
[21] S. Van der Burg, E. Dolstra, "Software Development in a Dynamic Cloud: From Device to Service Orientation in a Hospital. Environment", In 2009 Proc. ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing.
[22] O. Shimrat, 2009. Cloud Computing and Healthcare, San Diego Physician.org.
[23] Y. S. Mahajan, Z. Fu, and S. Malik, “Zchaff 2004: an efficient SAT solver," in Proc. 8 th International Conf. Theory Application Satisfiability Testing, pp. 360-375, Scotland, June 2005.
[24] T. Hofmeister, U. Schoning, R. Schuler, and O. Watanabe, “A probabilistic 3-SAT algorithm further improved," in Proc. 19 th Annual Symp.Theoretical Aspects Computer Science (SATACS), pp. 192-202, 2002.
[25] Matthew W. Moskewicz, Conor F. Madigan, Ying Zhao, Lintao Zhang and Sharad Malik," Chaff: Engineering an Efficient SAT Solver "in