1 A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions Ali Kashif Bashir, Senior Member, IEEE, Nancy Victor, Member, IEEE, Sweta Bhattacharya, Thien Huynh-The, Rajeswari Chengoden, Gokul Yenduri, Student Member, IEEE, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, Quoc-Viet Pham, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Senior Member, IEEE, and Madhusanka Liyanage, Senior Member, IEEE Abstract—Recent technological advancements have consider- healthcare professionals, lab technicians, and medical staff.
ately improved healthcare systems to provide various intelligent The conventional healthcare system served the community healthcare services and improve the quality of life. Federated abiding by medical policies such as Health Insurance Portabillearning (FL), a new branch of artificial intelligence (AI), opens ity and Accountability Act (HIPAA), World Health Organizaopportunities to deal with privacy issues in healthcare systems tion (WHO), etc. One of the latest trends in healthcare is the and exploit data and computing resources available at distributed devices. Additionally, the Metaverse, through integrating emerg- use of wearable devices to collect health data. It enables coning technologies, such as AI, cloud edge computing, Internet tinuous data tracking and immediate healthcare interventions.
of Things (Io T), blockchain, and semantic communications, Internet of Medical Things (Io MT) is a sub-area of Io T that has transformed many vertical domains in general and the deals with the collection of medical devices and applications healthcare sector in particular. Obviously, FL shows many that connect through computer networks. The data collected benefits and provides new opportunities for conventional and Metaverse healthcare, motivating us to provide a survey on the with the aid of wearable devices and Io MT are used for usage of FL for Metaverse healthcare systems. First, we present monitoring and further treatments. Privacy is one of the major preliminaries to Io T-based healthcare systems, FL in conventional concerns in wearable technologies [1]. Wearable technologies healthcare, and Metaverse healthcare. The benefits of FL in can give insights about the individual’s health as the data Metaverse healthcare are then discussed, from improved privacy are shared over the internet. Metaverse is a confluence of and scalability, better interoperability, better data management, and extra security to automation and low-latency healthcare multiple technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI), Virtual services. Subsequently, we discuss several applications pertaining Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), Internet of Medical to FL-enabled Metaverse healthcare, including medical diagnosis, Things (Io MT) etc. The health and fitness of the patients patient monitoring, medical education, infectious disease, and can be monitored and further improved through the use of drug discovery. Finally, we highlight significant challenges and Metaverse technologies [2]–[6]. Metaverse in healthcare helps potential solutions toward the realization of FL in Metaverse healthcare. in surgical simulation, diagnostic imaging, rehabilitation, and patient health management [7]. Moreover, Metaverse has the Index Terms—Federated Learning, Healthcare, Metaverse.
ability to motivate the patients to persistently do the required physical movements according to the treatment procedures.
I. INTRODUCTION VR-based treatments offer a drug-free method for trauma Healthcare is a system in which people are paid attention related anxiety.
to improving their physical, mental, and cognitive health by The existing healthcare system that utilizes the Metaverse means of diagnosis and prognosis measures. It is delivered by stores the data in a private or central cloud. Intelligent decisions are derived from the data which is being shared with Corresponding Author: Thippa Reddy Gadekallu the individual nodes [8]. Centralized decision-making is one Ali Kashif Bashir is with Manchester Metropolitan University, United Kingdom (email: Dr.alikashif.b@ieee.org) of the issues identified in the Metaverse for healthcare. The Nancy Victor, Sweta Bhattacharya, Rajeswari Chengoden, Gokul Yen- data are collected from multiple hospitals and stored in a duri, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta are with the School of Inforcentral repository. The Metaverse users majorly use bodymation Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu-632014, India (Email: {nancyvictor, sweta.b, rajeswari.c, gokul.yenduri, praveenku- worn devices, and much of the data collected is pertaining to marreddy}@vit.ac.in). the individual’s behavior and the surroundings. Data collected Quoc-Viet Pham is with School of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity from wearable devices are sent to the computer and to the College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Ireland (email: viet.pham@tcd.ie).
Thippa Reddy Gadekallu is with the School of Information Technology cloud. In all such cases, the data is shared in a public cloud and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore 632014, India as and hence there is a huge chance for the privacy to be well as with Depar Ftment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lebanese compromised. Latency is the time taken for the data to be American University, Byblos, Lebanon (Email: thippareddy.g@vit.ac.in) Thien Huynh-The is with the Department of Computer and Communication transferred from one point to the other [9]. A number of the Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology and Education, devices are connected and the users are connected remotely Vietnam (email: thienht@hcmute.edu.vn).
in the Metaverse environment. Providing fast, jitter-free, the Madhusanka Liyanage is with School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Ireland (email: madhusanka@ucd.ie). low latent end-to-end connection is a significant challenge to 3202 rp A 5 ]YC.sc[ 2 v 42500.4032:vi Xra 2 be tackled in the Metaverse applications. II. BACKGROUND The healthcare Metaverse application gets benefits from This section presents the significant aspects of conventional Federated Learning (FL) which enables individual hospitals healthcare and the healthcare Metaverse. The key benefits of to collaborate and learn from the shared predictive models.
the healthcare Metaverse are also discussed in this section. A FL allows on-device learning which helps to overcome the detailed description about the significance of implementing FL issues like data privacy, data security, and high data latency.
in the healthcare Metaverse is provided along with a discussion The distributed processing nature of FL enables the healthcare on the healthcare Metaverse platforms.
Metaverse gradually learn from the heterogeneous data [10].
In [11] medical Metaverse is used to diagnose fetal Con A. Conventional Healthcare and Healthcare Metaverse genital Heart Disease (CHD). Fetal ultrasound is obtained through ECG screening of pregnant women. The ultrasound In the past, before the development and popularity of dataset can be stored and thereafter AI models are deployed Internet-of-Things (Io T) systems for medical and healthcare, constituting of XR/VR to construct holographic fetal heart. patients have to spend more time and cost for clinics-related The cardiologists from different regions view the holographic services [16]. However, with several advantages for patients, fetal heart, refer to the predictive results of the AI model and hospitals, and medical centers, such as automatic health monconduct real-time consultation. The authors in [12] provide itoring and remotely collaborative medical diagnosis, many perspectives on the digital twin-based personal healthcare healthcare and medical systems based on Io T with cuttingframework that is used for the assessment and maintenance edge technologies (such as big data, artificial intelligence, and of personal health. In [13], the authors have developed a VR fifth generation) have completely revolutionize the healthcare based system and implemented the same for providing training industry to create more beautiful things all over the globe. In to nurses and medical interns. It is important to mention here many Io T-based healthcare systems, healthcare and medical that collaborations among pharmaceutical institutions often data (e.g., sequential data as electroencephalogram, highmake companies get susceptible to data privacy compromises dimensional data as ultrasound images, and documents as [14]. Horizontal FL provides an efficient solution to promote electronics health records) are collected using various smart collaboration ensuring data privacy is retained. In [15], the sensor-based devices (e.g., biosensors, wearable devices, smart authors have proposed a framework to maximize the potential gadgets, and medical equipment) with internet connection of AI modes by scaling the medical training dataset and [17]. The data is then stored in the local and its copy should enriching the heterogeneity of patient data distribution across be transmitted to the data center for cloud storage in the case the world. The proposed framework also shows interest in of direct acquisition from devices. At the data center, the data preserving the privacy of the data by fusing FL to the existing is processed and analyzed to extract meaningful and relevant methodologies. To the best of our knowledge, there has not information automatically with diversified artificial intellibeen a study that discusses the contribution of FL in healthcare gence (AI) tools, including feature engineering and machine Metaverse. Thus our study is an informative survey that learning (ML) algorithms. Finally, the results obtained by AI presents potential applications of integrating FL which would in service-oriented computation tasks are communicated to enhance privacy and in association to this, Metaverse would either the individual patients and the health service providers, enhance the effectiveness in providing healthcare services. wherein some primitive results can help doctors and health Table 1 presents the contribution of this paper. experts to make the final decision of medical diagnosis and plan the most appropriate treatment. It should be noted that The significant contributions of this paper are highlighted all the stages, starting from sensing to data acquisition and below: processing, require security mechanisms, from the physical layer to service and application layers, to protect sensitive 1) To understand the differences between conventional health data, high-level information, and diagnosis result from healthcare and the healthcare Metaverse cyberattacks [18].
2) To identify the applications of FL-enabled healthcare There are four layers in general Io T-based healthcare and Metaverse medical systems: sensing layer, network layer, processing 3) To highlight the potential challenges of implementing FL layer, and application layer.
in the healthcare Metaverse and present possible future directions • Sensing layer: As the patient-nearest module, this layer is responsible for data acquisition, which is arranged by The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II several wearable sensors to measure physiological paramhighlights the aspects of conventional healthcare, Metaverse eters from human body (e.g., temperature, blood pressure, healthcare and the significance of FL in conventional health- and glucose level). The number and types of sensors in care, whereas section III provides a detailed description about use may vary upon the applications for consideration and the benefits of FL in the healthcare Metaverse. Section IV the quality of providing services. Sensing usually plays an discusses about the various applications of adapting FL for the important role in various healthcare applications because healthcare Metaverse. The significant challenges and possible the sensed value acts as the input for processing and may future directions are presented in section V and section VI affect to the final diagnosis decision hereafter. Depending concludes the paper. on the purpose, there are two common options of sensory 3 TABLE I A COMPARISON OF THIS SURVEY WITH EXISTING SURVEYS FL Metaverse Applications Ref.No Medical Diagnosis Patient Monitoring Research & Education Infectious Diseases Drug Discovery [11] (cid:88) (cid:88) [12] (cid:88) (cid:88) [13] (cid:88) (cid:88) [14] (cid:88) (cid:88) [15] (cid:88) (cid:88) Our Paper (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) data storage: cloud-based and server-based infrastructures apps, in which the built-in functionalities and services [19]. may be easy for patients and advanced for medical and Networking layer: This layer is responsible for communi- wellness experts. It should be noted that the complexity • cation and security related activities, that means, selecting of an Io T-based healthcare system mostly depends appropriate data transmission protocols to transfer data upon the number of services and the complication of from source (e.g., heterogeneous sensors, devices, and functionalities.
medical equipment) to destination (e.g., server and cloud) While Metaverse is unfolding to many industrial domains, and encryption mechanisms to protect the data privacy.
it presents many opportunities in the healthcare sector that There are several communication protocols, but they are combines the cutting-edge technologies like AI, VR, Io T, inmostly categorized into three fashions depending on the telligent cloud, collaborative robotics, edge and quantum comrequirements of reliability and effectiveness: centralized, puting to provide new directions and breathtaking experiences decentralized, and hierarchical. During the data transto healthcare. To exactly specify the definition of Metaverse mission phase, some advanced security schemes can be Healthcare, it should interact with VR/AR glasses facilitated developed to detect and recognize cyberattacks, such as by Internet-of-Medical/Health-Things [23]. AR manipulates ransomware, data breaches, DD o S attacks, insider threats, visual elements and graphical characters to transmute the real and fraud scams [20].
world by enabling users to view their three-dimensional (3 D) Processing layer: Data management and computation • surroundings through AR devices, such as smart glasses. VR related activities are considered in this layer, in which creates a fully computer-generated digital world that users can various data analytic techniques are performed to eximmerse with VR headsets, gloves, controller, and other digital tract relevant and meaningful information from raw sensensors. Since healthcare and medical data are at high risk of sory data. For data management, three major aspects being stolen due to its storage on centralized servers, service are investigated, including storage type (centralized and providers realized that they should build an effective and distributed schemes), processing medium (in-networksecure health diagnosis platform to deal with a daily increasing based, base-station-based, and cloud-based data processcaseload. In this context, the Metaverse is already showing ing approaches), and data integration (individual and some significant benefits in digital therapeutics that VR and combined mechanisms). For computation, depending on AR technologies provide medical applications and services the data types, applications, and requirements, selecting with the support of haptic sensor and 3 D interaction [24].
an appropriate modeling method is crucial. For instance, Fig. 1 depicts the upcoming implications of the Metaverse the static modeling methods can generate an applicationin Healthcare. Some key benefits of Metaverse Healthcare are specific model to deal with the same disease of different foreseeable to revolutionize the whole healthcare industry as patients. Compared with static modeling, the dynamic follows: modeling can achieve real-time prediction and monitoring Medical training and education: The Metaverse opens • in various complicated health scenarios, in which the a new era for the healthcare industry, wherein cognitive AI technologies with ML algorithms can be applied to therapy and rehabilitation are considered for development enhance the overall performance of systems [21].
as built-in services in the Metaverse. Service providers Application layer: This layer maganes all • efficiently interact with patients and other clinicians for control/interaction/actuation and application related remotely collaborative diagnosis, stimulate effects of a activities, wherein the patients can receive feedback proposed treatment, and experience more personalized and the clinicians can view primitive analysis and technologies for better diagnosis [25]. Within the Metadiagnosis results from the processing layer [22]. In many verse, medical students and trainees can be provided a automated healthcare systems, all potential solutions deep understanding about human physiology over interand recommendations are given by systems based on active holographic projections [26].
the learned models, whereas the manual mode provides Change people lifestyle: Digital platforms based on the • suggestions and recommendations to doctors to make Metaverse allows users to have an immersive experithe decision based on the combination of his experiences ence by enticing a feeling of their all-time presence in and patients’ conditions. Besides, a verity of applications connected virtual worlds. As one of some outstanding are developed with user interface as mobile and desktop long-term effects of the Metaverse relating to mental 4 Cobot Surgery Metaverse Medical Training al git Di e s Metaverse Medical M et a v e T r wi n s Investigation ssecc A etome R Upcoming implications for Metaverse in Healthcare The increase of virtual hospitals The gamification of healthcare AR/VR-powered surgeries Patient Monitoring s si o n g a Di al c di e M Education & Training Health & Nutrition Teleconsultation Collaborative Surgeries Advantages of Metaverse in Healthcare Fig. 1. Upcoming implications of the Metaverse in Healthcare.
health, psychiatrists and psychotherapists could exploit industry, and insurance companies, among other sources. Data the immersive experiences in the Metaverse to treat science technologies now have an improbable chance to get several challenging issues, such as eating disorders, anx- insights from data and raise the standard of healthcare services iety disorders, delusions, psychosis, and hallucinations because of this access [29]. However, the acquisition of enor- [27]. Furthermore, gamification and personalization in mous, diversified, centrally stored healthcare datasets is almost the Metaverse can change the current lifestyle of people. impossible due to strict privacy laws and data ownership For example, both the professionals and patients are considerations. On the other hand, the AI model demands recommended to follow a healthy lifestyle routine and an increasing amount of healthcare data in order to provide get incentives in the form of tokens or rewards. better decisions. FL offers promising solutions to this issue, Connected community: Last but not least, the Metaverse and the advantages of adapting FL over conventional methods • is expected to be an ideal connected hub for people to are discussed below.
socialize in a more and more digitized community [28].
Privacy: FL offers training without compromising privacy • In the Metaverse Healthcare, patients who have the same of healthcare data. FL has enormous potential for conhealth issues or needed sesha, can share experiences, necting disparate healthcare data sources while protecting give advises, and support others for the better in the privacy. FL uses a central server to train a common long run. Hospital staffs can resolve problems by keeping global model while preserving all the sensitive data at the track of the time and workload seamlessly via a virtual local institutions where it belongs [30]. Thus, FL enables space but using data collected from the real world. In healthcare organisations to create reliable and trustworthy other words, the Metaverse evolves the next generation of models by participating in collaborative training without health facilities, wellness institutions, and medical centers disclosing data to third parties. As a result, it provides which all are housed in a single Metaverse.
new opportunities for industry and research and enhances health care all around the world. FL can have positive B. FL in Conventional Healthcare impact on almost all stakeholders and the entire treatment As computer software and hardware technologies advance cycle, better diagnostic tools for clinicians, including imquickly, more and more healthcare data are becoming available proved medical image analysis, collaborative and accelerfrom patients, healthcare organizations, the pharmaceutical ated drug discovery, true precision medicine by assisting 5 in the identification of similar patients, and which reduces devices such as VR mobiles, VR headsets, gloves with haptic, cost and time-to-market for pharmaceutical companies smart glasses, gesture, voice, miniaturized biosensors, smart [31]. contact lenses and human brain-computer interface systems.
Reduced Computational Cost and Power Consumption: With the haptic technology, users can operate electronics • The accuracy of AI models will increase as more data gadgets in mid-air (e.g., picking up a 3 D lung object to zoom is gathered. However, if all the healthcare data is kept in in and rotate for diagnosis) without touching screen or buttonone location, training a model will take more time and aided control.
resources [32]. With FL, there is no need to store data in a Decentralization: In the domain of healthcare, the Metaverse certain place. Instead, a global model can be trained based should be decentralized, open, and diffused, that means, it is on the parameters shared by the local models. When governed by a single entity and belongs to no one but serving compared to conventional models, FL does not require everyone at the same time. Decentralization encompasses the any personal data from the local models, which lowers blockchain, self-sovereign digital identity mechanisms, smart the cost of computational resources and lowers power contracts, open-source platforms to enable and facilitate the usage [33]. increasing growth of distributed computing and healthcare mi Personalization: FL also allows local model to train at croservices in a scalable environment, serving many crowded • local network, and the cloud for global model aggre- patient and medical expert communities [38], [39]. A host gation. The distributed datasets, which may vary across of decentralized healthcare Metaverse projects can use the various local nodes, are the major source of data used blockchain technology to provide patient-owned private data for training at the cloud server. The shared model may (e.g., sensory data, medical image, and electronics health not work well for a specific user since it purely accounts records) and shareable clinic experiences (e.g., diagnosis and for the traits that all health users have in common [34]. treatment approaches) in a transparent and traceable manner As a consequence, each user incorporates the learned to perform transactions and interactions.
global model with his own unique health data to provide Spatial computing: as standing for a real/virtual combinapersonalized health monitoring. The local devices get the tion, spatial computing dims the borderline between the actual global model from the cloud and train their unique model and ideal worlds. In the healthcare domain, spatial computing in order to capture the tailored services. Additionally, is all material, libraries, and AI tools to create 3 D immersive a balanced dataset is created for every device using experience for real-world healthcare and wellness applications the global model from the cloud, reducing the disparity as well as medical services [9]. For instance, medical students between individualised models and the global model [35]. have opportunity to practice and test their ability in realistic environments without risk over a virtual surgical training C. The Healthcare Metaverse Platform applications built in the Metaverse. Some 3 D design engines Metaverse has been built to intently provide permanent, like Unity and Unreal support for 3 D modeling and rendering decentralized, collaborative, and interoperable opportunities with GPU s for displaying geometry and animation. Spatial and business models that will allow companies to extend computing also helps to integrate diversified healthcare and their digital operations [10]. A general Metaverse platform medical data from different devices and sources for between for healthcare and medical can have seven layers, including visualization and analysis using VR devices.
infrastructure, human interface, decentralization, spatial com- Economy: This layer is responsiable for economic establishputing, economy, discovery, and experience as from the bottom ment and development in the Metaverse, in which patients, to the top layers as shown in Fig. 2, as from the bottom to doctors, healthcare institutions, and medical clusters can manthe top, but not being strict and may be changed upon many age their business in many unique kinds. Patients can allow the metrics, such as applications, services provided, scalability, service providers to use their private data for research activities and requirement. and other non-commercial purposes, meanwhile, the providers Infrastructure: At the bottom, the infrastructure layer per- will reward their contribution by virtual goods, assets, and tains to all technological infrastructure things that are required incentives. There are some economic actitivies provided by to create a fully immersive, functional, and interoperable healthcare and medical institutions, such as managing a virtual Metaverse [36]. Networking and wireless communication with market of digital contents (e.g., medical training, remotely 5 G, 6 G, and Wi Fi, cloud storage architecture, VR systems, mi- collaborative diagnosis, and treatment plan) and trading health croelectromechanical systems, and graphics processing units things and medical equipment (e.g., first aid kit, thermometer, are some major technology clusters to build a healthcare and wheelchair), wherein retail shops should be placed in Metaverse, which allows to seamlessly connect decentralized the virtual world [40]. Indeed, it has enormous potential for healthcare and medical centers. So far the Metaverse stands economic expansion by generating a virtual space for not only on the foundation of powerful computers, integrated medical patients and doctors but also content creators and designer to circuits, communication components, healthcare and medical connect and communicate in the Metaverse.
equipments, and mixed reality devices. Discovery: Discovery can be understood as an advertis Human interface: The human interface layer mentions about ing ecosystem which includes store placements, rating systhe hardware or the devices that enable users (doctors, clini- tems, and recommendation systems from users and service cians, and patients) to experience the true immersive experi- providers. This layer conveys the experiential learning that ence in the virtual world [37]. This layer involves wearable can be achieved as the results of pull and push information 6 Ad Network Rating Services Notification Social Health check Scanning Training Diagnosis Retail Shop NFT Market Notification Creation EXPERIENCE 3 D Modeling AI Agents 3 D Design UI/UX Data Integration DISCOVERY ECONOMY Blockchain Smart Contract Pricacy Distributed Computing SPATIAL COMPUTING AR/VR Smart Glasses Gloves Haptic Wearable BCI DECENTRALIZATION HUMAN INTERFACE Storage GPU s Wi Fi 6 G Healthcare Center Medical Equipment INFRASTRUCTURE Fig. 2. The Healthcare Metaverse Platform.
constantly. Particularly in the Metaverse for healthcare and A. Improved Privacy medical domains, pull represents an inbound system where pa The Metaverse provides doctors and patients with an imtients proactively look for useful information and experiences mersive and interactive healthcare experience with the aid of (e.g., disease symptoms and treatment plans shared by other technologies such as AI, AR/VR/MR, blockchain and digital patients), whereas push in more outbound and incorporates twins. The Metaverse environment can collect the patients’ denotice procedures about what experiences awaiting patients in tails such as the brainwaves, health related data, and biometric the Metaverse [41]. Some major modules are usually deployed data to create a complete healthcare system that simulates the in the Metaverse to make profit, including inbound with healthcare system of the physical world and could use the search engine, community-driven content, application stores, same for understanding the patients’ body, their physiological and real-time presence, and outbound with display advertising, responses, and the way their body would react in case of notifications, emails and other social media.
specific treatment procedures. However, such data, if fallen Experience: This layer contains what the most individuals into the hands of the malicious users could manipulate it, thus and business are focusing on. Users, including patients and leading to serious complications such as improper diagnosis, clinicians, has various interactive activities, with virtual objects treatment, and drug administration. Therefore, preserving data and each other, in digitally-driven setting via digital content privacy is of great importance in the case of healthcare such as disease symptom declaration, health and medical Metaverse [8]. FL is the privacy-preserving machine learnchecking, remotely collaborative diagnosis, medial training ing mechanism that enables different participating entities to and education. As known that the Metaverse is more than jointly collaborate a machine learning model without actually a simple 3 D representation of reality, it was introduced as sharing the data, but only the model parameters. As most of the ultimate virtualization of physical space and product to the data of a particular patient is maintained by a single edge engender a seamlessly virtual-realistic ecosystem with built-in device/ hospital, FL mechanisms help in training the data on services and applications. For example, an interactive virtual the edge devices itself. This enables the centralized medical reality surgery platform can help doctors to find an anatomy agencies to improve their models without actually collecting of interest and utilize meaningful information, from learned the private data of users.
AI model, to enhance the quality of medical images in the real time.
B. Better Interoperability between Different Stakeholders The healthcare Metaverse can collect data from multi III. BENEFITS OF FL IN HEALTHCARE METAVERSE ple healthcare centres/ hospitals for ensuring greater patient This section highlights the potential benefits of adopting diversity from different demographics [42]. However, data FL in the healthcare Metaverse environment such as providing interoperability between different stakeholders is a significant improved privacy, better interoperability, data management and challenge in the Metaverse environment, since the data colcross-model usage, extra security, automation and intelligence, lected from multiple devices/ Metaverses need to be made improved scalability and low latency support. accessible to the trusted parties. Such data can be used for 7 finding patient similarity [43], remote patient monitoring [44], data from different edge devices, the entire learning process and for predicting mortality rates. In order to address these can be accelerated, thus enabling enhanced energy-efficiency issues, FL can be used for pooling data from every edge node/ and intelligent responsiveness in terms of automation and hospital, train them on the edge devices itself and send the relevant decision making. Thus, the comprehensive, intelligent updates to the server, so that the model can be globally trained and automated healthcare scenario in the Metaverse can be in the Metaverse, thereby mitigating localized biases and significantly improved with FL by learning from every client, offering customized and effective solutions for rare diseases or yet by keeping the data private.
during a pandemic. The problem of data interoperability can thus be addressed using FL mechanisms, thereby providing F. Improved Scalability quality healthcare to the patients.
The healthcare Metaverse signifies an immersive and shared environment that spans a myriad of 3 D virtual worlds of C. Better Data management and Cross-model usage patients and healthcare providers. However, building a scalable The data sources of the healthcare Metaverse include sen Metaverse is quite challenging as it is almost impossible to use sors, AR/VR devices, wearable devices, scanning machines traditional servers [48]. The scalability issues in a healthcare and other healthcare components. Such data that is widely Metaverse correspond to the multitude of users interacting distributed needs to be aggregated for making intelligent in the virtual and real worlds, complexity of the scene with decisions in a healthcare scenario. This is particularly useful respect to its appearance and detailing, and the range of interin conducting collaborative research in applications such as actions between the users. The healthcare Metaverse architecbuilding a unified and global model for disease diagnosis, ture should be built in such a way that the system efficiency identifying disease pattern trends and so on. However, due is not compromised and best personalized experience could to the heterogeneity of data, it becomes quite challenging to be provided to the patients and the healthcare providers. FL train the data at the central server [45]. FL mechanisms can be techniques can help in solving the scalability issues in the employed here to deal with the issues of data heterogeneity healthcare Metaverse by providing a de-centralized system for by training the data at the devices itself. Vertical FL, also various medical applications such as diagnosis and treatment.
known as heterogeneous FL helps in training the datasets that This de-centralized system allows an efficient and concurrent share the same sample ID space but differing in feature space.
system usage for a wide variety of users in the Metaverse Thus FL mechanisms can guarantee proper data management healthcare scenario.
and cross-model usage witin and between different healthcare Metaverses.
G. Low Latency Support D. Extra Security Network latency refers to the delay in communication over a network. In a healthcare Metaverse, network latency plays a The major security challenges in the Metaverse environment major role especially in critical applications such as surgeries include user identity spoofing and account hacking, thus that require quick response to deliver a safe, reliable, and resulting in the avatar itself to be taken over by the intruders.
good experience. Any delay in communication could have It is critical in the case of a healthcare Metaverse, as the serious effects leading to life-threatening situations. In order to intruders can use such data collected from hospitals, patients support immersive Metaverse experiences, approximately 0-20 and other healthcare providers to manipulate the data itself or millisecond latency is required. Healthcare Metaverses require the decisions regarding disease diagnosis and medications to even lower latency for supporting services such as personalized be provided [46]. FL can help in such scenarios by making medical recommendations, collaborative surgeries and quickuse of its secure aggregation mechanisms to keep the updates reaction services between patients an doctors present at various of the edge devices private. The actual value or the source locations [49]. FL support collaborative model training without of model updates is thus secured, by reducing the likelihood having the data to be shared to the centralized server, thus of data attribution and inference attacks. FL mechanisms can minimizing the amount of data transfers required between the thus ensure extra security in a healthcare Metaverse.
edge devices and the healthcare Metaverse environments. FL thus help in personalized healthcare recommendations, disease E. Automation and Intelligence diagnoses and other prediction and recommendation systems The healthcare Metaverse enables medical professionals in a healthcare Metaverse environment. Fig. 3 summarizes the to provide quality services to the patients, which was diffi- benefits of FL in the healthcare Metaverse.
cult earlier especially due to geographical limitations. With the advancements in the key enabling technologies such as IV. APPLICATIONS AR/VR, AI, DT, and blockchain, automation in the healthcare Metaverse is possible in all the application areas such as The various applications pertaining to FL enabled healthcare diagnostics, billing, scheduling of appointments, data sharing, Metaverse are discussed in this section. The healthcare apasset tracking and post-treatment care. However, the automa- plications explored are medical diagnosis, patient monitoring, tion process needs to be energy-efficient and faster [47]. collaborative research, medical education, infectious diseases As the FL model doesn’t require collecting and aggregating or pandemics and drug discovery.
8 Improved Better Interoperability Better Data Privacy between Different Management and Stakeholders Cross-model usage Prevents data manipulation Mitigating localized biases Data heterogeneity Jointly collaborate a ML model Offering customized, effective Proper data management, without sharing the data solutions for rare diseases cross-model usage Benefits of FL in Healthcare Metaverse AR/VR 3 D Modelling Blockchain Global Update Model Update MG Metaverse o lo db Global Update ea Model Update ML Central Server l l Edge Edge 5 G & Beyond Nodes Federated Learning Nodes Io MT Devices Io MT Devices G G M o d e l e n e r a te L o c a L o c a l D a ta M o d e l e n e r a te L o c a L o c a l D a ta Io T l l AI Model Training Model Training Edge Big Data Computing Analytics Benefits of FL in Healthcare Metaverse Automation Improved Scalability Extra Security and Intelligence and Latency Provides secure aggregation Enhanced energy-efficiency mechanisms Intelligent responsiveness in Provides de-centralized system Reducing the likelihood of data terms of automation and Provides quick response, attribution and inference attacks relevant decision making. reliable, good experience Fig. 3. Benefits of FL in the healthcare Metaverse.
A. Medical Diagnosis cal professionals can even provide personalized diagnoses with the help of the Metaverse, where doctors and patients can Medical diagnosis deals with identifying patients’ diseases interact in shared, persistent and immersive virtual worlds [11].
based on their symptoms [50]. The conventional method of ML models can use the data collected using wearable devices disease diagnosis is carried out physically at health centres or and other systems in the Metaverse environment for training hospitals, where the patient needs to be examined by a doctor.
the model. However, this requires the entire data to be present However, during emergencies, the conventional diagnosis apin the system where the training is done. In addition, as the proaches may result in delayed treatment that may cause loss data collected may contain patients’ private information, any of lives. Therefore, telemedicine was introduced as a solution leakage of such information may have serious consequences.
for monitoring patients remotely [51]. Furthermore, the rapid For instance, the Metaverse environment requires data from the developments in AI have contributed to all domains, including real world to create digital simulations of the patients through healthcare. By mimicking human cognitive capabilities, ML digital twins [53]. Digital twins can be created for the patient models can make better decisions regarding disease diagnosis population, individuals, or the organs. These digital twins can by getting trained on the data collected from various health be manipulated to obtain clear insights in the decision making centres [52]. However, one of the notable limitations of process. The data may be collected through different sources telemedicine is that the patients cannot clearly express their such as AR/VR devices and wearables. If the malicious users symptoms or the level of injury as they don’t meet the health get hold of this collected data, they could manipulate it to professionals in person.
create false diagnoses and improper treatments. Therefore, the The Metaverse is an ideal solution in such scenarios model training should happen without exposing the patients’ where enabling technologies like AR, VR, digital twins, and private information.
blockchain helps create a real-world digital simulation. Medi 9 Consider an example where a unified global disease diag- It is important to mention the role of Digital Twin in this nosis model need to be built for the healthcare Metaverse. regard, wherein test dummies could be used to understand The centralized healthcare Metaverse requires the data to how a patient would be recovering from a surgery or how be collected from various edge devices or other Metaverses. a post operative patient would react to a specific medication However, as the patient’s data is sensitive, sharing the data [60]. Metaverse also empowers the use of medical wearables in its raw form to the central server for training the global for patients and healthcare providers wherein these devices model may violate the HIPAA rules [54]. However, a machine provide alerts to emergency staff and care givers to alert them learning model cannot be trained without having the actual in case of exceptional events like seizers, Chronic Obstructive data made available to the original model. FL helps in such Pulmonary Disease flare-ups or any healthcare anomalies for scenarios by creating a global disease diagnosis model without remote patients. The wearables enable physicians to get high sharing the original data as such. In the case of horizontal FL, quality data and make necessary inferences and predictions for all the datasets across devices use the same set of features [55]. accelerated and immediate dissemination of treatment through Initially, a global model would be created and broadcasted to AI. These technologies also facilitate Metaverse aided daily the edge devices or the participating Metaverses. The model check-ups enabling necessary decision making. In case pf would then be trained locally at their side with their own Psychiatric patients Metaverse based remote healthcare treatdatasets. Only the parameter updates pertaining to the model ment is highly effective which help them interact in situations will be sent back to the central server. After averaging the which cause anxiety and depression. The use of AR, VR based updates from different clients, the server updates it’s original Metaverse helps healthcare professionals to closely monitor model and the updated model will be sent again to all the the remote environment of such patients and alert family participating clients.This process continues until a predefined members on situations which might cause anxiety, anger or set of rounds or until optimal results are obtained. As multiple psychosis attacks [12].
devices or Metaverses can jointly train a model under the The use of FL is significant in this regard wherein secured coordination of the central Metaverse server while retaining data transfer across the stake holders is necessary to ensure the training data at the client side itself, FL mechanisms seamless rendering of remote treatment facility. The traditional play a major role in ensuring data privacy in the Metaverse systems which store and maintain healthcare records in cenenvironment [56]. tralized computers are vulnerable to theft and data tampering.
Since patients are remotely located, the use of FL provides distributed platform of intelligent techniques enabling multi B. Patient Monitoring institutional collaborations ensuring privacy of patient data. In The Metaverse has completely revolutionized remote pa- case of remote monitoring, the use of FL provides increased tient treatment and monitoring. The use of blockchain, AR, network capacity which also support Quality of Service (Qo S).
VR, MR and decentralized applications provide solutions to This enables patients to get enhanced experience wherein the problems of designing and developing Metaverse. This medical professionals can seamlessly monitor patients and Metaverse would offer real-time patient monitoring ensuring get information on any anomalies immediately without delay rich human interaction and recreation of in-person experience. ensuring immediate and accelerated treatment. Also, with the Immersive 3 D interfaces are used in this regard that provide ever increasing population and scarcity of healthcare experts vivid and realistic user experience for monitoring of patients the use of FL provides the scalability to handle the huge from geographically distributed locations enabling synchro- patient load wherein considerable number of patients are nized and real-time digital interaction between patients and treated remotely through the Metaverse relieving burden of healthcare providers. Telemedicine in healthcare is one aspect the healthcare professionals [61].
that helps in providing medicine as a remote service. The need of telemedicine has been felt significantly during the C. Collaborative Research and Medical Education surge of COVID 19 [57]. Before the pandemic of 2020, 43 percent of healthcare facilities provided remote treatment to Digital transformation has been adopted enthusiastically in patients and now the figure stands at 95 percent [58]. The various domains especially in collaborative research due to the use of Metaverse technologies have curtailed the need of emergence of virtual reality and related technologies. Further, routine physical consultations by doctors and nurses which VR has visualized rapid proliferation with the progressive have further reduced their respective workload providing the growth in Metaverse technology. The increased adoption of ability to treat minor health conditions remotely. Telemedicine these technologies have reduced the associated cost of imconsultations through VR have open possibilities to interact plementation and made it more accessible for common users with consultants and experts from any distant places across [62]. Experimentation and research are intrinsic aspects of the globe by the use of simple head sets. The MRI and higher education programs wherein researchers often find scans can be performed locally in a nearby facility and the it difficult to learn and retain information without handsdata is transferred to the medical expert located anywhere on experimentation. Also justification of the experimental in the world. This type of facility is extremely beneficial in results lag authenticity due to the same reason. The VR countries that face acute shortage of medical professionals. On based simulated labs provide the necessary experimental and the contrary, patients from rural and remote regions need not hands-on learning experience. In case of biomedical research, travel greater distances to avail medical facility [7], [59]. students can perform various critical experimentation using 10 chemicals in a VR based safe zone with no risks of harming used in the Metaverse environment as an integrated package.
property or human life [63]. The challenges pertaining to As the number of students grow, the data and communication availability of chemical or related resources also gets elim- standards are also expected to grow rapidly facilitating crossinated wherein experiments can be repeated multiple times to Metaverse communication. The use of FL helps in simpler ensure justification of results. Also, the removal of risks ensues transfer of data across various platforms and networks ensuring innovation and creativity among student minds to design and privacy, scalability and interoperability. But dissemination of develop experiments which could lead to path-breaking results such services requires sharing of extensive medical image and discoveries contributing immensely towards the growth of data across multiple Institutions which are used by healthcare science [64]. The impact of Metaverse can be a game changing professionals and researchers to develop data-driven models experience in collaborative research wherein improved data for delivering enhanced healthcare services. The amount of driven decision making would be possible across chemical data available at individual healthcare centers are limited and value chain existing in various laboratories across the globe. deep learning models which are trained on the local centers A holistic approach to digital twin can enable improvement alone fail to deliver the required level of performance. The of process and control-system engineering from the very best solution is to collect data from these individual centers early stages of any collaborative project design. The use of and collate it in one center but this has associated challenged advanced simulation and modeling technologies can enable of compromising data privacy, The use of privacy-preserving multiple teams located globally to work on common projects, algorithms on the data available at multiple centers would develop steady state design models and then integrate them also serve the similar purpose of preserving privacy. The use into dynamic models. These models can be tested through real- of FL in such circumstances would enable deployment of time dynamic simulations for supporting process engineering large scale ML models trained on healthcare data available execution [65]. Although Metaverse enables such collaborative at individual centers without sharing of sensitive information.
research but there are associated concerns pertaining to dis- The FL framework would eliminate the need of transferring tributional discrepancies across multiple stake holders which data and instead a general model could be trained on local could lead to counterproductive consequences. FL enables data set which could be further transferred between the data achieving collaborative equilibrium by ensuring security is centers [25].
not compromised wherein smaller collaboration coalitions In medical education, quality of training is dependent on can be created. In such cases each client can collaborate variability of patients and the number of difficult cases hanwith other team members who maximally improve the model dled in a particular health center. Considering geographical and isolate the ones whose contribution is minimum. FL locations, the patient trait differ significantly across hospitals enables multi-institutional collaborations ensuring data privacy wherein tertiary hospitals witness more volume in the number is maintained. The model-learning manages all the available of difficult cases in comparison to secondary hospitals. The data without sharing it across the participating Institutions, evaluation on an atypical patient at a certain hospital on The model-training is distributed across all the data-owners the basis of such training model may be inadvisable as the and the results are aggregated [66]. model lags the experience to learn from previously handled In the field of medical education, the Metaverse allows atypical cases. A FL based model in the healthcare Metaverse healthcare professionals to engage with each other through would enable incorporation of data from multiple Institutions simulation based training while pursuing their medical educa- in association with virtual presence of healthcare experts tion. As an example, in case of surgery, Metaverse usage need leading to generation of accurate treatment to atypical patients to be complemented by understanding of instrument usage that even in secondary healthcare centers. The exams conducted enables dexterous grasping capabilities. Thus the need evolves for medical students can also be verified from recordings of for the tracking of technologies being used to enhance the the procedures performed. This would enhance quality and flexibility and adaptability of the Metaverse technologies. The standard of evaluation wherein a medical Institute expert facdoctors and experts can use the Metaverse technology to train ulty located in a geographically distant location can evaluate fellow doctors and other medical staffs wherein virtual reality performance of the students using virtual reality or related can enable trainers to get detailed visualization of the human technology in the Metaverse. Similarly, interactive question body and also provide 360 degree view of the patient ailments. answer sessions can be conducted by using a VR to take Similarly medical procedures could also be replicated using an examiner inside the human body and ask questions on Io T, Digital Twins, 6 G networks, robots, edge, cloud, quantum details of human anatomy or disease diagnosis. However, computing for the development of VR, AR and MR based interoperability, scalability and privacy may be a concern. With systems to be used in medical diagnosis and treatment [67], the increase in the number of medical Institutes and number of [68]. In case of surgeries, the use of robotics in the Metaverse students, such interactive exam sessions can confront potential environment would enable surgeries to be performed with latency issues. Also, since it is an examination, data privacy enhanced precision and flexibility. The cloud based and real- also acts as a challenge. The role of FL would enable negating time communication technologies in the Metaverse enables all such challenges and help healthcare professionals to conmedical students to practise their skills with optimum level of duct exams without sharing of data. Also, the decentralized accuracy ensuring patients get satisfactory healthcare service system in FL would enable multiple medical students to pursue at the right place and time. Different types of assets in the form such aforementioned interactive examinations effectively and of avatars, 3 D models, mixed reality and spatial settings are concurrently in a Metaverse healthcare environment [69].
11 D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic E. Drug Discovery Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the models. Machine learning models play a major role here in Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected improving the decision making for applications such as hit the economic and social stability of the nations to a great discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimizaextent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society tion [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76].
entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result can collaborate in building the required models. However, of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alle Healthcare Metaverses can help in such scenarios by creviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the ating a virtual simulation of the real-world laboratory or surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can by creating a completely new experimental laboratory space integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, where multiple hospitals and researchers can experiment on retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration drug design either by sharing the original data set to the would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even central medical agency or by sharing only the intermediate with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread results [77]. However, such experimental research also face of disease.
significant challenges as explained below. Preserving data The Metaverse can be adopted here by creating a digital privacy is challenging if the data is shared in its raw form.
world replica of the real world and understand how the real If the participating entities decide to share only the interworld acts and reacts. Such a Metaverse realization can better mediate results, the drug discovery process may not succeed detect a pandemic and respond effectively. However, as the always as most of the process would be hidden from the data collected from different edge devices are heterogeneous, central laboratory. Also, scalable solutions are required in efficient cross-model usage becomes a significant concern. such scenarios, as the existing approaches may not work well Also, security and privacy plays a major role in such scenarios, to accommodate such large data. FL can be applied in the as the data needs to be shared among nations for creating healthcare Metaverse for ensuring data privacy and scalability a global disease prediction and pattern evaluation model to in the drug discovery process. This helps in training a global take any significant steps for mitigating the spread of the model for decision-making across various critical applications disease. Even healthcare Metaverse proves to be beneficial such as prediction of the 3 D- protein structure, drug-protein inin performing surgeries [73], patient monitoring and disease teractions, analyzing the efficiency of a drug, and guaranteeing diagnosis [74]. FL can be adopted in such situations, as it safety biomarkers within and between Metaverses. Consider provides extra security, better data management and cross- a scenario where various countries have agreed to develop a model usage. The authors in [15] used FL to detect COVID- global drug prediction model with the data from the geograph 19 related Computed tomography (CT) abnormalities. As an ically distributed patients [78]. The relevant drug solutions example, considering the COVID-19 pandemic period, various would differ based on the location and type of the disease.
countries had patients suffering from different variants of the In such circumstances, research related to drug discovery of corona virus. Hence, the relevant drug solutions would also the disease would require data pertaining to all of such variants differ based on the location and type of the virus. Also, the rather than being skewed to a particular location or community.
kind of preventive measures to be adopted by each nation Hence cross-institutional data is required to enable exhaustive differ significantly. Hence, personalized solutions are required research on the virus leading to the discovery of effective drug especially during pandemic period. FL enabled healthcare solutions targeting each variant of the deadly virus. The role of Metaverse helps in such situations by creating a global model FL is significant in such scenarios which enable secure transfer that could be used by any of the participating clients for of such confidential data pertaining to molecular dynamics of training and testing their own data. This would help to obtain the virus across multiple Institutes located at geographically customized solutions for the end user. Adopting FL in such distributed locations [79]. The scalability and interoperability situations will not only help in data privacy preservation, but of the FL based Metaverse framework would enable scientists also in addressing the scalability concerns in a Metaverse across the globe to collaboratively work on development of healthcare environment.The technique proved to be efficient in appropriate drug solutions based on cross-institutional and preserving patients’ privacy, when compared to the traditional cross-national big dataset yielding customized and efficient method of training the data locally at the edge devices. FL thus solutions. Another important application is in understanding helps in building a global model without having the original molecular features that help in predicting the cancer drug data to be shared to any centralized Metaverse server, thereby response. The authors in [14] developed a horizontal FL model securing the data from any kind of malicious users. for Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) anal 12 P Privacy, Security, m riv a y, Pri v a A c u y t , o I S n m e t e a c l t u l i i o g ri n e t y n M & , P c o a e t n i e it n o t ri n g Int R e E S e r d o c s u a p e c l e a a a r r b a t c i i b l h o it il y n i & t y & u In s t a P e g a ll e i n a g , n e d S a n e e g c m c c e e u y m , i , r c S i e I t n y c n , t a t e A , l a r C u o b t p r i o o l e i m t s r y a s a - b t m i i o li o t n y d , , e D m l a ta M Pri v a c y, S e c A u u r t it o m ati o n I & nt elli g e n c e M e di c a D l i a g n o si s Applications- M F e L t a E v n e a r b s l e ed Healthcare D is c o v D e r r y u g o d e l u s a a g n e a g & e m S P e e c r n i u v t, r a i C t c y y r , o D s s a - ta Fig. 4. Applications of the FL-enabled Healthcare Metaverse.
ysis. As each of these applications are critical and require closer to consumers than cloud servers, enabling the Metaverse scalable solutions, FL proves to be the effective solution for to deliver a service. The use of hierarchical cloud native dealing with such issues in the healthcare Metaverses for technologies offers high computational and storage resources.
the drug discovery process. Fig. 4 depicts the applications To enhance devices’ performance, the appropriate combination of the FL-enabled healthcare Metaverse. Table II highlights of edge and cloud-based applications is required [80].
the technical aspects of FL for various healthcare Metaverse applications. B. Synchronization between physical and virtual worlds 1) Introduction to issues: A crucial problem in the health V. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS care Metaverse is the synchronisation of the real and virtual In this section, we will discuss several challenges and future worlds. The creation of healthcare-based global-model for directions of FL in the healthcare Metaverse. patient diagnosis or at the time of drug creation in the FL enabled healthcare Metaverse demands real-time data from A. Limited Computing Capabilities diverse devices and sensors. In order to deliver data from the physical world to the FL enabled healthcare Metaverse, a 1) Introduction to issues: FL enables the healthcare Metanetwork that is dependable with minimal latency is required.
verse to develop a global model by gathering information 2) Possible Solutions: The 6 G network is a potential sofrom several decentralised healthcare clients in the Metaverse.
lution in addressing synchronisation of the real and virtual FL allows on-device training in the healthcare Metaverse worlds. 6 G operate in the terahertz band and have a peak and updates the global model based on local model updates rate of 1 T b/s and a network with ultra-reliable and lowwhile preserving the client’s private local data. FL provides latency communication of less than 1 ms. The total quality a lot of advantages, including scalability and data privacy of experience for FL enabled healthcare Metaverse is greatly in the healthcare Metaverse. However, healthcare Io T-enabled improved by 6 G wireless networks [68].
devices that are used in the healthcare Metaverse, such as surgery robots and low-cost computing healthcare devices built C. Privacy and Security using limited processing power, bandwidth, and storage. This creates a challenge for adapting FL in the health Metaverse. 1) Introduction to issues: FL is able to safeguard each 2) Possible Solutions: Edge computing is a potential so- participant’s privacy in the healthcare Metaverse since the lution in overcoming this current challenge. Applications model training will be done locally, with just the model paneeding high bandwidth and low latency near the data source rameters being sent to the FL server. However, sharing model benefit from mobile edge computing. For instance, to save updates with other users in the healthcare Metaverse during energy and compute resources, devices might offload difficult training might still provide adversaries or intruders access to activities to nearby edge servers. Edge servers will provide private data. FL in the healthcare Metaverse is also susceptible services with minimal latency since they are significantly to problems with communication security including jamming 13 TABLE II TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF FL FOR HEALTHCARE METAVERSE APPLICATIONS.
Application Privacy Interoperability Data management & Security Automation & Scalability Cross-model usage Intelligence Medical Diagnosis H L M H H L Patient Monitoring H L M H H L Collaborative Research and Medical Education H H H H M H Infectious diseases/ Pandemic H H H H H H Drug discovery H M H H M M L Low Significance M Medium Significance H High Significance and distributed denial-of-service (Do S) attacks. With regard to model optimization may be unfair to certain devices if it genjamming attacks in particular, an attacker may send out strong erates disproportionate advantages or disadvantages for them.
radio frequency jamming signals to obstruct or interfere with FL towards fairness is a need. FL requires a rational incentive the connections between mobile healthcare Metaverse devices system and equal resource allocation. A significant difficulty and the main server. Such an assault may result in model in the healthcare Metaverse is the equitable distribution of upload/download errors, which would reduce the FL systems’ computational and communication resources.
accuracy and performance in the healthcare Metaverse . 2) Possible Solutions: The development of high quality 2) Possible Solutions: The challenge of user data privacy in based incentive mechanisms encourages more devices to take the healthcare Metaverse can be overcome with the use of dif- part in the creation of global model in the healthcare Metaferential privacy and collaborative training. The performance, verse. As a result, these devices are able to earn greater or model accuracy, is reduced when these methodologies rewards for the high-quality data they contribute and the reare used, however. They also demand a substantial amount sources they share, which ultimately leads to an improvement of processing power from participating healthcare Metaverse in the reliability of the model as well as the improved learning devices. As a result, while developing the FL system, the performance of FL models. Additionally, this encourages the trade-off between privacy assurance and system efficiency development of fair FL models.
must be carefully considered. The problem of security can be overcome by using anti-jamming techniques like frequency VI. CONCLUSION hopping, which includes transmitting one extra copy of the Given the lack of a survey on FL-enabled Metaverse healthmodel update across several frequencies.
care, we have provided a detailed survey on the usage of FL for Metaverse healthcare. We have first presented the D. Lack of Explainabilty fundamentals of FL, healthcare systems, and Metaverse, as well as the introduction to the benefits of FL and Metaverse in 1) Introduction to issues: The black-box nature of FL intelligent healthcare. The key applications of FL in Metaverse models hinders users from understanding the model’s output.
healthcare in the open literature have been explored. One The unsupported predictions or conclusions of the black-box of the applications is medical diagnoses, where FL helps to model might result in a catastrophic failure in the healthcare create a collaborative and global model without sharing the Metaverse in a complex situation. As in the case of a medical original data from Io T devices. The key applications also equipment that uses a visual recognition model to identify include patient monitoring, collaborative research and medical a patient’s sickness. if the model is difficult to understand education, infection prevention, and drug discovery, where and the doctor is unable to assess the results. Clinicians in the focus is to use the capabilities of FL in using data the healthcare Metaverse may make bad decisions because of availability, exploiting powerful resources at distributed Io T the black-box model’s false interpretation. An interpretable devices, and improving data privacy. Based on the reviewed FL model must be developed to provide a greater range of literature, we have emphasized vital challenges in using FL healthcare Metaverse judgements.
for Metaverse healthcare and pointed out several interesting 2) Possible Solutions: The usage of Explainable AI (XAI) research solutions. It is noted that both FL and Metaverse are is a potential solution to the issue of creating explainable and new technologies, and there are lots of room for improvements interpretable FL models in the healthcare Metaverse. XAI ha in intelligent healthcare and smart medical services. We do a collection of techniques and strategies that enable stackexpect that this work will stimulate more research attention holders in the healthcare Metaverse to grasp and rely on the and drive innovative research ideas for FL-enabled Metaverse output and results generated by prediction models.
healthcare.
E. Fair FL REFERENCES 1) Introduction to issues: In Fl, tens of thousands of devices [1] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy,” in Automata, Languages and Programwill be used to train a single global model that will be used ming: 33 rd International Colloquium, ICALP 2006, Venice, Italy, July across the healthcare Metaverse. In such a system, naive global 10-14, 2006, Proceedings, Part II 33. Springer, 2006, pp. 1–12.
14 [2] G. Wang, A. Badal, X. Jia, J. S. Maltz, K. Mueller, K. J. Myers, [24] W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Cao, C. Miao, S. Sun, and C. Niu, M. Vannier, P. Yan, Z. Yu et al., “Development of metaverse Q.Yang,“Realizingthemetaversewithedgeintelligence:Amatchmade for intelligent healthcare,” Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–8, 2022. in heaven,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 2022.
[3] X. Zhou, Y. Li, and J. Zhao, “Resource allocation of federated learning [25] S. Sandrone, “Medical education in the metaverse,” Nature Medicine, assisted mobile augmented reality system in the metaverse,” in 2023 pp. 1–2, 2022.
IEEEI nternational Conferenceon Communications(ICC). IEEE,2023. [26] I. Skalidis, O. Muller, and S. Fournier, “Cardioverse: The cardiovascular [4] X. Zhou, J. Zhao, H. Han, and C. Guet, “Joint optimization of en- medicine in the era of metaverse,” Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine, ergy consumption and completion time in federated learning,” in 2022 2022.
IEEE 42 nd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems [27] M. J. Koohsari, G. R. Mc Cormack, T. Nakaya, A. Yasunaga, D. Fuller, (ICDCS). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1005–1017. Y. Nagai, and K. Oka, “The metaverse, the built environment, and public [5] X. Zhou and J. Zhao, “Mobile augmented reality with federated learning health: Opportunities and uncertainties,” Journal of Medical Internet in the metaverse,” ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2212.08324, 2022. Research, vol. 25, p. e 43549, 2023.
[6] X. Zhou, C. Liu, and J. Zhao, “Resource allocation of federated learn- [28] A. Musamih, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, I. Yaqoob, D. Puthal, and ing for the metaverse with mobile augmented reality,” ar Xiv preprint S. Ellahham, “Nfts in healthcare: Vision, opportunities, and challenges,” ar Xiv:2211.08705, 2022. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 2022.
[29] M. Ali, F. Naeem, M. Tariq, and G. Kaddoum, “Federated learning [7] G. Bansal, K. Rajgopal, V. Chamola, Z. Xiong, and D. Niyato, “Healthfor privacy preservation in smart healthcare systems: A comprehensive care in metaverse: A survey on current metaverse applications in healthcare,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 119914–119946, 2022. survey,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics, 2022.
[30] V. A. Patel, P. Bhattacharya, S. Tanwar, R. Gupta, G. Sharma, P. N.
[8] T. Zhang, J. Shen, C.-F. Lai, S. Ji, and Y. Ren, “Multi-server assisted Bokoro, and R. Sharma, “Adoption of federated learning for healthcare data sharing supporting secure deduplication for metaverse healthcare informatics: Emerging applications and future directions,” IEEE Access, systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 140, pp. 299–310, 2022.
2023.
[31] A.Sadilek,L.Liu,D.Nguyen,M.Kamruzzaman,S.Serghiou,B.Rader, [9] O. J. Gupta, S. Yadav, M. K. Srivastava, P. Darda, and V. Mishra, “Un A. Ingerman, S. Mellem, P. Kairouz, E. O. Nsoesie et al., “Privacy-first derstanding the intention to use metaverse in healthcare utilizing a mix health research with federated learning,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 4, method approach,” International Journal of Healthcare Management, no. 1, p. 132, 2021.
pp. 1–12, 2023.
[32] W. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Qin, R. Xu, D. Dimitriadis, and T. Qin, [10] B. Han, H. Wang, D. Qiao, J. Xu, and T. Yan, “Application of zero- “Personalized federated learning with adaptive batchnorm for healthwatermarking scheme based on swin transformer for securing the care,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 2022.
metaverse healthcare data,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health [33] D. Ng, X. Lan, M. M.-S. Yao, W. P. Chan, and M. Feng, “Federated Informatics, 2023.
learning: a collaborative effort to achieve better medical imaging models [11] S. Qiao, S. Pang, Y. Sun, G. Luo, W. Yin, Y. Zhao, S. Pan, and Z. Lv, for individual sites that have small labelled datasets,” Quantitative “Sprechd: Four-chamber semantic parsing network for recognizing fetal Imaging in Medicine and Surgery, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 852, 2021.
congenitalheartdiseaseinmedicalmetaverse,”IEEEJ ournalof Biomed- [34] A. Rehman, I. Razzak, and G. Xu, “Federated learning for privacy ical and Health Informatics, 2022.
preservation of healthcare data from smartphone-based side-channel [12] Y.-T. Song and J. Qin, “Metaverse and personal healthcare,” Procedia attacks,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 2022.
Computer Science, vol. 210, pp. 189–197, 2022.
[35] D. C. Nguyen, Q.-V. Pham, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, A. Seneviratne, [13] S.-H. Wu, C.-C. Huang, S.-S. Huang, Y.-Y. Yang, C.-W. Liu, B. Shulruf, Z. Lin, O. Dobre, and W.-J. Hwang, “Federated learning for smart and C.-H. Chen, “Effect of virtual reality training to decreases rates of healthcare: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 55, no. 3, needle stick/sharp injuries in new-coming medical and nursing interns pp. 1–37, 2022.
in taiwan.” Journal of educational evaluation for health professions, [36] D. B. Rawat and H. El Alami, “Metaverse: Requirements, architecture, vol. 17, pp. 1–1, 2020.
standards, status, challenges, and perspectives,” IEEE Internet of Things [14] S. Chen, D. Xue, G. Chuai, Q. Yang, and Q. Liu, “Fl-qsar: a federated Magazine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 14–18, 2023.
learning-based qsar prototype for collaborative drug discovery,” Bioin- [37] A. M. Aslam, R. Chaudhary, A. Bhardwaj, I. Budhiraja, N. Kumar, formatics, vol. 36, no. 22-23, pp. 5492–5498, 2021.
and S. Zeadally, “Metaverse for 6 g and beyond: The next revolution [15] Q. Dou, T. Y. So, M. Jiang, Q. Liu, V. Vardhanabhuti, G. Kaissis, Z. Li, and deployment challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, vol. 6, W. Si, H. H. Lee, K. Yu et al., “Federated deep learning for detecting no. 1, pp. 32–39, 2023.
covid-19 lung abnormalities in ct: a privacy-preserving multinational [38] E. D. Villarreal, J. Garc´ıa-Alonso, E. Moguel, and J. A. H. Alegr´ıa, validation study,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2021.
“Blockchain for healthcare management systems: A survey on interop- [16] M. J. Baucas, P. Spachos, and K. N. Plataniotis, “Federated learning erability and security,” IEEE Access, 2023.
and blockchain-enabled fog-iot platform for wearables in predictive [39] T. Huynh-The, T. R. Gadekallu, W. Wang, G. Yenduri, P. Ranaweera, healthcare,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 2023.
Q.-V. Pham, D. B. da Costa, and M. Liyanage, “Blockchain for the [17] R. Singh, A. D. Dwivedi, G. Srivastava, P. Chatterjee, and J. C.-W.
metaverse: A review,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2023.
Lin, “A privacy preserving internet of things smart healthcare financial [40] Z. Huang, C. Xiong, H. Ni, D. Wang, Y. Tao, and T. Sun, “Standard system,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023.
evolution of 5 g-advanced and future mobile network for extended reality [18] W. Wen, U. Demirbaga, A. Singh, A. Jindal, R. S. Batth, P. Zhang, and and metaverse,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
G. S. Aujla, “Health monitoring and diagnosis for geo-distributed edge 20–25, 2023.
ecosystem in smart city,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023.
[41] J. G. Wu, D. Zhang, and S. M. Lee, “Into the brave new metaverse: [19] J. Tian, F. Jiang, Q. Zeng, M. Pourhosseini Asl, C. Han, and K. Ren, Envisaging future language teaching and learning,” IEEE Transactions “Biocompatible piezoelectric polymer poly (lactic acid)-based stetho- on Learning Technologies, 2023.
scope for wearable health monitoring devices,” IEEE Sensors Journal, [42] T. Wischgoll, A. Stork, H. Schilling, and G. Scheuermann, “Metaverse: 2023. Technologies for virtual worlds,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli- [20] A. Gupta, S. Misra, N. Pathak, and D. Das, “Fedcare: Federated cations, vol. 43, no. 02, pp. 11–12, 2023.
learning for resource-constrained healthcare devices in iomt system,” [43] S. Pai and G. D. Bader, “Patient similarity networks for precision IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 2023. medicine,” Journal of molecular biology, vol. 430, no. 18, pp. 2924– [21] Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos, and S. W. 2938, 2018.
Kim, “The future of healthcare internet of things: a survey of emerging [44] J. D. Coffey, L. A. Christopherson, A. E. Glasgow, K. K. Pearson, J. K.
technologies,”IEEEC ommunications Surveys&Tutorials,vol.22,no.2, Brown, S. R. Gathje, L. R. Sangaralingham, E. M. Carmona Porquera, pp. 1121–1167, 2020. A. Virk, R. Orenstein et al., “Implementation of a multisite, interdisci- [22] T. Sultana and K. A. Wahid, “Choice of application layer protocols for plinary remote patient monitoring program for ambulatory management next generation video surveillance using internet of video things,” IEEE of patients with covid-19,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Access, vol. 7, pp. 41607–41624, 2019. 2021.
[23] P. Zikas, A. Protopsaltis, N. Lydatakis, M. Kentros, S. Geronikolakis, [45] D.Zytkoand J.Chan,“Thedatingmetaverse:Whyweneedtodesignfor S. Kateros, M. Kamarianakis, G. Evangelou, A. Filippidis, E. Grigoriou consent in social vr,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer et al., “Mages 4.0: Accelerating the world’s transition to vr training and Graphics, 2023.
democratizing the authoring of the medical metaverse,” IEEE Computer [46] D. Beck, L. Morgado, and P. O’Shea, “Educational practices and Graphics and Applications, 2023. strategies with immersive learning environments: Mapping of reviews 15 for using the metaverse,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, projects: The framework and its significance,” Procedia Computer 2023. Science, vol. 176, pp. 2125–2132, 2020.
[47] A. Tlili, R. Huang, and x. Kinshuk, “Metaverse for climbing the ladder [67] M. A. I. Mozumder, M. M. Sheeraz, A. Athar, S. Aich, and H.-C. Kim, toward ‘industry 5.0’and ‘society 5.0’?” The Service Industries Journal, “Overview: Technology roadmap of the future trend of metaverse based pp. 1–28, 2023. oniot,blockchain,aitechnique,andmedicaldomainmetaverseactivity,” [48] A. Mc Stay, “The metaverse: Surveillant physics, virtual realist gover- in 2022 24 th International Conference on Advanced Communication nance, and the missing commons,” Philosophy & Technology, vol. 36, Technology (ICACT). IEEE, 2022, pp. 256–261.
no. 1, p. 13, 2023. [68] B. Siniarski, C. De Alwis, G. Yenduri, T. Huynh-The, G. GU¨r, [49] D. Gruson, R. Greaves, P. Dabla, S. Bernardini, B. Gouget, and T. K. T. R. Gadekallu, and M. Liyanage, “Need of siniarski 2022 need O¨z, “A new door to a different world: opportunities from the metaverse for thesiniarski 2022 need metaverse realization,” ar Xiv preprint and the raise of meta-medical laboratories,” Clinical Chemistry and ar Xiv:2301.03386, 2022.
Laboratory Medicine (CCLM), no. 0, 2023. [69] S. Huh, “Application of computer-based testing in the korean medical [50] Y. Sun, J. Liu, K. Yu, M. Alazab, and K. Lin, “Pmrss: privacy- licensing examination, the emergence of the metaverse in medical edupreserving medical record searching scheme for intelligent diagnosis cation, journal metrics and statistics, and appreciation to reviewers and in iot healthcare,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, volunteers,” Journal of Educational Evaluation for Health Professions, no. 3, pp. 1981–1990, 2021. vol. 19, 2022.
[70] J. C. Buck and S. B. Weinstein, “The ecological consequences of a [51] A. Romanovs, E. Sultanovs, E. Buss, Y. Merkuryev, and G. Majore, pandemic,” Biology Letters, vol. 16, no. 11, p. 20200641, 2020.
“Challenges and solutions for resilient telemedicine services,” in 2020 [71] I. Ifdil, D. D. B. Situmorang, F. Firman, N. Zola, I. B. Rangka, and IEEE 8 th Workshop on Advances in Information, Electronic and Elec R. P. Fadli, “Virtual reality in metaverse for future mental health-helping trical Engineering (AIEEE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–7.
profession: an alternative solution to the mental health challenges of the [52] R. Aggarwal, V. Sounderajah, G. Martin, D. S. Ting, A. Karthikecovid-19 pandemic,” Journal of Public Health, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. e 142– salingam, D. King, H. Ashrafian, and A. Darzi, “Diagnostic accuracy e 143, 2023.
of deep learning in medical imaging: A systematic review and meta- [72] C. A. Onggirawan, J. M. Kho, A. P. Kartiwa, A. A. Gunawan et al., analysis,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2021.
“Systematic literature review: The adaptation of distance learning pro- [53] M. Alazab, L. U. Khan, S. Koppu, S. P. Ramu, M. Iyapparaja, cess during the covid-19 pandemic using virtual educational spaces in P. Boobalan, T. Baker, P. K. R. Maddikunta, T. R. Gadekallu, and metaverse,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 216, pp. 274–283, 2023.
A. Aljuhani, “Digital twins for healthcare 4.0-recent advances, archi- [73] F. W. van Leeuwen and J. A. van der Hage, “Where robotic surgery tecture, and open challenges,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, meets the metaverse,” p. 6161, 2022.
2022.
[74] Y. Yang, K. Siau, W. Xie, and Y. Sun, “Smart health: Intelligent health- [54] G. J. Annas, “Hipaa regulations: a new era of medical-record privacy?” care systems in the metaverse, artificial intelligence, and data science New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 348, p. 1486, 2003.
era,” Journal of Organizational and End User Computing (JOEUC), [55] R. S. Antunes, C. Andre´ da Costa, A. Ku¨derle, I. A. Yari, and vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2022.
B. Eskofier, “Federated learning for healthcare: Systematic review and [75] S. Dara, S. Dhamercherla, S. S. Jadav, C. Babu, and M. J. Ahsan, architecture proposal,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and “Machine learning in drug discovery: a review,” Artificial Intelligence Technology (TIST), vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1–23, 2022.
Review, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1947–1999, 2022.
[56] J. Thomason, “Metahealth-how will the metaverse change health care?” [76] V. D. Mouchlis, A. Afantitis, A. Serra, M. Fratello, A. G. Papadiamantis, Journal of Metaverse, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13–16, 2021.
V. Aidinis, I. Lynch, D. Greco, and G. Melagraki, “Advances in de [57] J. Portnoy, M. Waller, and T. Elliott, “Telemedicine in the era of covidnovo drug design: From conventional to machine learning methods,” 19,”The Journalof Allergyand Clinical Immunology:In Practice,vol.8, International journal of molecular sciences, vol. 22, no. 4, p. 1676, no. 5, pp. 1489–1491, 2020.
2021.
[58] L. M. Koonin, B. Hoots, C. A. Tsang, Z. Leroy, K. Farris, B. Jolly, [77] S. Joshi and P. Pramod, “A collaborative metaverse based a-la-carte P. Antall, B. Mc Cabe, C. B. Zelis, I. Tong et al., “Trends in the use frameworkfortertiaryeducation(co-mate),”Heliyon,vol.9,no.2,2023.
of telehealth during the emergence of the covid-19 pandemic—united [78] F. Shi, H. Ning, X. Zhang, R. Li, Q. Tian, S. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Guo, states, january–march 2020,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, and M. Daneshmand, “A new technology perspective of the metaverse: vol. 69, no. 43, p. 1595, 2020.
its essence, framework and challenges,” Digital Communications and [59] R. Chengoden, N. Victor, T. Huynh-The, G. Yenduri, R. H. Jhaveri, Networks, 2023.
M. Alazab, S. Bhattacharya, P. Hegde, P. K. R. Maddikunta, and [79] S. Surveswaran and L. Deshpande, “A glimpse into the future: Ai, digital T. R. Gadekallu, “Metaverse for healthcare: A survey on potenhumans,andthemetaverse–opportunitiesandchallengesforlifesciences tial applications, challenges and future directions,” ar Xiv preprint in immersive ecologies,” AI in Clinical Medicine: A Practical Guide for ar Xiv:2209.04160, 2022.
Healthcare Professionals, pp. 521–527, 2023.
[60] T. Erol, A. F. Mendi, and D. Dog˘an, “The digital twin revolution in [80] Z. Wang, Z. Zhou, H. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Ding, and A. Farouk, “Aihealthcare,” in 2020 4 th International Symposium on Multidisciplinary based cloud-edge-device collaboration in 6 g space-air-ground integrated Studies and Innovative Technologies (ISMSIT). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
power iot,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 16–23, [61] N. Rieke, J. Hancox, W. Li, F. Milletari, H. R. Roth, S. Albarqouni, 2022.
S. Bakas, M. N. Galtier, B. A. Landman, K. Maier-Hein et al., “The future of digital health with federated learning,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 119, 2020.
[62] A. S. Ahuja, B. W. Polascik, D. Doddapaneni, E. S. Byrnes, and J. Sridhar, “The digital metaverse: Applications in artificial intelligence, medical education, and integrative health,” Integrative Medicine Research, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 100917, 2023.
[63] G. Riva, “Virtual reality for health care: the status of research,” Cyberpsychology & Behavior, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 219–225, 2002.
[64] J. Iwanaga, E. C. Muo, Y. Tabira, K. Watanabe, S. J. Tubbs, A. V.
D’Antoni, M. Rajaram-Gilkes, M. Loukas, M. K. Khalil, and R. S.
Tubbs, “Who really needs a metaverse in anatomy education? a review with preliminary survey results,” Clinical Anatomy, vol. 36, no. 1, pp.
77–82, 2023.
[65] A. Aburayya, S. Salloum, K. Alderbashi, F. Shwedeh, Y. Shaalan, R. Alfaisal, S. Malaka, and K. Shaalan, “Sem-machine learning-based model for perusing the adoption of metaverse in higher education in uae,” International Journal of Data and Network Science, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 667–676, 2023.
[66] S.-n. Suzuki, H. Kanematsu, D. M. Barry, N. Ogawa, K. Yajima, K. T.
Nakahira, T. Shirai, M. Kawaguchi, T. Kobayashi, and M. Yoshitake, “Virtual experiments in metaverse and their applications to collaborative