1 Graph Transform Optimization with Application to Image Compression Giulia Fracastoro, Dorina Thanou, and Pascal Frossard Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new graph-based trans- in the lowest frequencies. This provides a strong advantage form and illustrate its potential application to signal compression. compared to the classical DCT transform especially when the Our approach relies on the careful design of a graph that image contains arbitrarily shaped discontinuities. In this case, optimizes the overall rate-distortion performance through an the DCT transform coefficients are not necessarily sparse and effective graph-based transform. We introduce a novel graph contain many high frequency coefficients with high energy.
estimation algorithm, which uncovers the connectivities between the graph signal values by taking into consideration the coding The GFT, on the other hand, may lead to sparse representations of both the signal and the graph topology in rate-distortion and eventually more efficient compression.
terms. In particular, we introduce a novel coding solution for the However, one of the biggest challenges in graph-based graph by treating the edge weights as another graph signal that signal compression remains the design of the graph and the lies on the dual graph. Then, the cost of the graph description corresponding transform. A good graph for effective transform is introduced in the optimization problem by minimizing the sparsity of the coefficients of its graph Fourier transform (GFT) coding should lead to easily compressible signal coefficients, on the dual graph. In this way, we obtain a convex optimization at the cost of a small overhead for coding the graph. Most problem whose solution defines an efficient transform coding graph-based coding techniques focus mainly on images, and strategy. The proposed technique is a general framework that they construct the graph by considering pairwise similarities can be applied to different types of signals, and we show two among pixel intensities [4], [5] or using a lookup table that possible application fields, namely natural image coding and piecewise smooth image coding. The experimental results show stores the most popular GFT s [6]. It has been shown that that the proposed graph-based transform outperforms classical these methods could provide a significant gain in the coding fixed transforms such as DCT for both natural and piecewise of piecewise smooth images. Instead, in the case of natural smooth images. In the case of depth map coding, the obtained images, the cost required to describe the graph often outweighs results are even comparable to the state-of-the-art graph-based the coding gain provided by the adaptive graph transform, and coding method, that are specifically designed for depth map images. often leads to unsatisfactory results. The problem of designing a graph transform stays critical and may actually represent the major obstacle towards effective compression of signals that I. INTRODUCTION live on an irregular domain.
In the last years, the new field of signal processing on In this work, we propose a new method for designing a graphs has gained increasing attention [1]. Differently from graph transform that takes into account the coding of the signal classical signal processing, this new emerging field considers values as well as the cost of coding the graph. Second, we signals that lie on irregular domains, where the signal valpresent an innovative way for coding the graph by treating its ues are defined on the nodes of a weighted graph and the edge weights as a graph signal that lies on the dual graph. We edge weights reflect the pairwise relationship between these then compute the graph Fourier transform of this signal and nodes. Particular attention has been given to the design of code its quantized transform coefficients. The choice of the flexible graph signal representations, opening the door to new graph is thus posed as a rate-distortion optimization problem.
structure-aware transform coding techniques, and eventually The cost of coding the signal is captured by minimizing the to more efficient signal and image compression frameworks.
smoothness of the graph signal on the adapted graph. The As an illustrative example, an image can be represented by coding cost of the graph itself is controlled by penalizing the a graph, where the nodes are the image pixels and the edge sparsity of the graph Fourier coefficients of the edge weight weights capture the similarity between adjacent pixels. Such signal that lies on the dual graph. The solution of our optia flexible representation permits to go beyond traditional mization problem is a graph that provides an effective tradeoff transform coding by moving from classical fixed transforms between the sparsity of the signal transform coefficients and such as the discrete cosine transform (DCT) [2] to graphthe graph coding cost.
based transforms that are better adapted to the actual signal We apply our method to two different types of signals, structure, such as the graph Fourier transform (GFT) [3].
namely natural images and piecewise smooth images. Exper Hence, it is possible to obtain a more compact representation imental results on natural images confirm that the proposed of an image, as the energy of the image signal is concentrated algorithm can efficiently infer meaningful graph topologies, which eventually lead to a graph transform that can out G. Fracastoro is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Italy (e-mail: giulia.fracastoro@polito.it). perform non-adaptive classical transforms such as the DCT.
D.Thanouiswiththe Swiss Data Science Center,EPFL/ETHZ,Switzerland Moreover, we show that our method can significantly improve (e-mail: dorina.thanou@epfl.ch).
the classical DCT on piecewise smooth images, and it even P. Frossard is with the Signal Processing Laboratory (LTS 4), EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: pascal.frossard@epfl.ch). leads to comparable results to the state-of-the-art graph-based 9102 lu J 03 ]TI.sc[ 3 v 39360.2171:vi Xra 2 depth image coding solutions. However, in contrary to these B. Graph-based image coding dedicated algorithms, it is important to underline that our In the last years, graph signal processing has been applied to framework is quite generic and can be applied to very different different image coding applications, especially for piecewise types of signals.
smooth images. In [4], [5], the authors propose a graph-based Our work extends our previous study [7], where we have coding method where the graph is defined by considering shown that an initial version of our graph compression scheme pairwise similarities among pixel intensities. Another efficient could be successfully applied to compression of natural imgraph construction method for piecewise smooth images has ages. In this paper we show that the proposed method is been proposed in [6], where the authors use a lookup table highly general and it can be adapted to different types of that stores the most popular graphs. Then, for each signal, they signals. In addition, we present a deeper theoretical discussion perform an exhaustive search choosing the best GFT in rateon the GFT, highlighting its connection with the Karhunendistortion terms. Furthermore, a new graph transform, called Loe`ve transform and justifying its use for image coding. The signed graph Fourier transform, has been presented in [11].
extension proposed in this paper offers a complete description This transform is targeted for compression of depth images of our novel system and a comprehensive performance analysis and its underlying graph contains negative edges that describe with extensive comparisons for various transforms.
negative correlations between pixel pairs.
The outline of the paper is as follows. We first discuss Recently, a number of methods using a graph-based aprelated work in Section II. We then introduce some preliminary proach have also been proposed for transform coding of inter definitions on graphs in Section III. Next, we present the and intra predicted residual blocks in video compression. A proposed graph construction problem in Section IV. The appli- novel graph-based method for intra-frame coding has been cation of the proposed graph construction algorithm to image presented in [12], which introduces a new generalized graph coding and the entire compression framework are described Fourier transform. A graph-based method for inter predicted in Section V. Then, the experimental results on natural images video coding has been introduced in [13], where the authors and piecewise smooth images are presented in Section VI and design a set of simplified graph templates capturing the basic VII, respectively. Finally we draw some conclusions in Section statistical characteristics of inter predicted residual blocks.
VIII. Furthermore, a few separable graph-based transforms for residual coding have also been introduced. In [14], for example, the authors propose a new class of graph-based separable II. RELATED WORK transforms for intra and inter predictive video coding. The proposed transform is based on two separate line graphs, In this section, we first provide a brief overview of transform where the edge weights are optimized using a graph learning coding. Then, we focus on graph-based coding and learning problem. Another graph-based separable transform for inter methods, that are closely related to the framework proposed predictive video coding has been presented in [15]. In this case, in this work. the proposed transform, called symmetric line graph transform, has symmetric eigenvectors and therefore it can be efficiently implemented.
A. Transform coding Finally, a few graph-based methods have also been presented for natural image compression. In [16], a new tech Lossy image compression usually employs a 2 D transform nique of graph construction targeted for image compression to produce a new image representation that lies in the transis proposed. This method employs innovative edge metrics, form domain [8]. Usually, the obtained transform coefficients quantization and edge prediction technique. Moreover, in [17], are approximately uncorrelated and most of the information a new class of transforms called graph template transforms has is contained in only a few of them. It is proved that the been introduced for natural image compression, focusing in Karhunen-Loe`ve transform (KLT) can optimally decorrelate a particular on texture images. Finally, a method for designing signal that has Gaussian entries [9]. However, since the KLT is sparse graph structures that capture principal gradients in based on the eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix, this image code blocks is proposed in [18]. However, in all matrix or the transform itself has to be sent to the receiver. For these methods, it is still not clear how to define a graph this reason, the KLT is not practical in most circumstances [8].
whose corresponding transform provides an effective tradeoff The most common transform in image compression is the DCT between the sparsity of the transform coefficients and the [2], which employs a fixed set of basis vector. It is known that graph coding cost.
the DCT is asymptotically equivalent to the KLT for signals that can be modelled as a first-order autoregressive process C. Graph construction [10]. Nevertheless, this model fails to capture the complex and nonstationary behavior that is typically present in natural Several attempts to learn the structure and in particular a images. In the light of the above, transform design is still an graph from data observations have been recently proposed, active research field and in the last years many signal adaptive but not necessarily from a compression point of view. In transforms have been presented. In this paper, we focus on [19]–[21], the authors formulate the graph learning problem a specific type of adaptive transforms, namely graph-based as a precision matrix estimation with generalized Laplacian transforms. constraints. The same method is also used in [14], [15], where 3 the authors use a graph learning problem in order to find the Then, the smoothness of x on G can be measured using the generalized graph Laplacian that best approximates residual Laplacian L [25] video data. Moreover, in [22], [23], a sparse combinatorial N N Laplacian matrix is estimated from the data samples under a 1 (cid:88)(cid:88) x TL x = W (x − x )2. (2) ij i j smoothness prior. Furthermore, in [17], the authors use a graph 2 i=1 j=1 template to impose on the graph Laplacian a sparsity pattern Eq. (2) shows that a graph signal x is considered to be smooth and approximate the empirical inverse covariance based on if strongly connected nodes have similar signal values. This that template.
equation also shows the importance of the graph. In fact, Even if all the methods presented above contain some with a good graph representation the discontinuities should be constraints on the sparsity of the graph, none of them explicitly penalized by low edge weights, in order to obtain a smooth takes into account the real cost of representing and coding the representation of the signal. Finally, the eigenvectors of the graph. In addition, most of them do not really target images.
Laplacian are used to define the graph Fourier transform (GFT) Instead, in this paper, we go beyond prior art and we fill this [1] of the signal x as follows: gap by defining a new graph construction problem that takes into account the graph coding cost. Moreover, we show how xˆ = ΨTx.
our generic framework can be used for image compression.
The graph signal x can be easily retrieved from xˆ by inversion, namely x = Ψxˆ. Analogously to the Fourier transform in the III. BASIC DEFINITIONS ON GRAPHS Euclidean domain, the GFT is used to describe the graph signal For any graph G = (V,E) where V and E represent respec- in the Fourier domain.
tively the node and edge sets with |V| = N and |E| = M, we define the weighted adjacency matrix W ∈ RN×N where B. Comparison between KLT and GFT W is the weight associated to the edge (i,j) connecting ij nodes i and j. For undirected graphs with no self loops, W As we have said in Section II, the KLT is the transform is symmetric and has null diagonal. The graph Laplacian is that optimally decorrelates a signal that has Gaussian entries.
defined as L = D −W, where D is a diagonal matrix whose In this section, we discuss the connection of the graph Fourier i-th diagonal element D is the sum of the weights of all the transform with the KLT, showing that the GFT can be seen as ii edges incident to node i. Since L is a real symmetric matrix, an approximation of the KLT.
it is diagonalizable by an orthogonal matrix Let us consider a signal x ∈ RN that follows a Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF) model with respect to a graph L = ΨΛΨT, G, with a mean µ and a precision matrix Q. Notice that the GMRF is a very generic model, where the precision matrix can where Ψ ∈ RN×N is the eigenvector matrix of L that contains be defined with much freedom, as long as its non-zero entries the eigenvectors as columns, and Λ ∈ RN×N is the diagonal encode the partial correlations between random variables, and eigenvalue matrix, with eigenvalues sorted in ascending order.
as long as their locations correspond to the edges of the graph.
In the next sections, we will use also an alternative definition It has been proved that, if the precision matrix Q of the GMRF of the graph Laplacian L that uses the incidence matrix B ∈ model corresponds to the Laplacian L, then the KLT of the RN×M [24], which is defined as follows signal x is equivalent to the GFT [26].
 As shown before, the graph Laplacian has a very specific 1, if e = (i,j)   structure where the non-zero components correspond to the B = −1, if e = (j,i) ie edges of the graph, and, for this reason, it is a sparse matrix,  0, otherwise, since typically |E| (cid:28) N 2. Since the precision matrix in general does not have such fixed structure, we now study where an orientation is chosen arbitrarily for each edge. Let the KLT of a signal whose model is a GMRF with a generic W(cid:99) ∈ RM×M be a diagonal matrix where W(cid:99) = W if ee ij precision matrix Q. In this case, the GFT does not correspond e = (i,j). Then, we can define the graph Laplacian L as to the KLT anymore and the GFT should be considered as L = BW(cid:99)BT. (1) an approximation of the KLT, where the precision matrix is forced to follow this specific structure. In order to find the GFT It is important to underline that the graph Laplacian obtained that best approximates the KLT, we introduce a maximum using (1) is independent from the edge orientation in G. likelihood estimation problem, using an approach similar to the one presented in [20]. The density function of a GMRF has the following form [27] A. Graph Fourier Transform (cid:18) (cid:19) 1 A graph signal x ∈ RN in the vertex domain is a real-valued p(x) = (2π)−N 2 (det Q) 1 2 exp − (x − µ)TQ(x − µ) .
2 function defined on the nodes of the graph G, such that x , i i = 1,...,N is the value of the signal at node i ∈ V [1]. For The log-likelihood function can then be computed as follows example, for an image signal we can consider an associated 1 graph where the nodes of the graph are the pixels of the image. log L(Q,µ|x) = log(det Q) 2 1 − (x − µ)TQ(x − µ). (3) 2 4 Given x ,...,x observations of the signal x, we find the description R (L). Each of these terms depends on the graph 1 n G Laplacian matrix L that best approximates Q by solving the characterized by L and on the coding scheme. We describe following problem them in more details in the rest of the section.
max log L(L,µ|x ,...,x ), 1 n (4) L∈Γ A. Distortion approximation where Γ denotes the set of valid Laplacian matrices. Then, by We define the distortion D(L) as follows using (3), the problem in (4) can be written as D(L) = (cid:107)u − u˜(L)(cid:107)2 = (cid:107)uˆ(L) − uˆ (L)(cid:107)2, q 1 max log(det ∗L) 1 2 − tr((X − µ¯)TL(X − µ¯)), (5) where u and u˜(L) are respectively the original and the 2 L∈Γ reconstructed signal, and uˆ(L) and uˆ (L) are respectively the q where X is the matrix whose columns are the N column transform coefficients and the quantized transform coefficients.
vectors x ,x ,...,x , and µ¯ is a matrix having µ as all 1 2 N The equality holds due to the orthonormality of the GFT. If we its columns and det ∗ is the pseudo-determinant (since L is consider a uniform scalar quantizer with the same step size q singular). The optimization problem in (5) defines the graph for all the transform coefficients and if q is small, the expected whose GFT best approximates the KLT. The advantage of value of the distortion D(L) can be approximated as follows using the GFT instead of the KLT is that we force the precision [28] matrix to follow the specific sparse structure defined by the q 2 N D = .
Laplacian. In this way, the transform matrix can be transmitted 12 to the decoder in a more compact way. However, even if the With this high-resolution approximation, the distortion de Laplacian matrix is more sparse than the precision matrix, pends only on the quantization step size and it does not depend the optimization problem in (5) still does not explicitly take on the chosen L [6]. For simplicity, in the rest of the paper into account the cost of the graph transmision, which is very we adopt this assumption. Therefore, the optimization problem important in compression applications. For this reason, in (6) is reduced to finding the graph that permits to minimize the next section we present a new graph learning method the rate terms.
that considers also this auxiliary cost and we highlight the connection between the proposed graph construction problem B. Rate approximation of the transform coefficients and the maximum likelihood estimation problem presented in We can evaluate the cost of the transform coefficients R (L) (5). c by evaluating the smoothness of the signal on the graph described by L. We use the approximation proposed in [6], IV. GRAPH TRANSFORM OPTIMIZATION [5], namely Graph-based compression methods use a graph representa- (cid:32) (cid:33) N−1 tion of the signal through its GFT, in order to obtain a data- (cid:88) R (L) = u TL u = u T λ (L)ψ (L)ψ (L)T u c l l l adaptive transform that captures the main characteristics of the l=0 signals. The GFT coefficients are then encoded, instead of the N−1 N−1 (cid:88) (cid:88) original signal values themselves. In general, if we consider a = λ (L)(u Tψ (L))(ψ (L)Tu) = λ uˆ2(L), l l l l l signal that is smooth with respect to its graph representation, l=0 l=0 its energy is concentrated in the low frequency coefficients of (7) the GFT, hence it is easily compressible. In order to obtain where λ (L) and ψ (L) are respectively the l-th eigenvalue l l good compression performance, the graph should therefore be and l-th eigenvector of L. Therefore, R (L) is an eigenvaluec chosen such that it leads to a smooth representation of the weighted sum of squared transform coefficients. In this way, it signal. At the same time, it should also be easy to encode, since assumes that the coding rate decreases when the smoothness of it has to be transmitted to the decoder for signal reconstruction.
the signal over the graph defined by L increases. In addition, This is a very important requirement, because often the cost (7) relates the measure of the signal smoothness with the of the graph representation outweighs the benefits of using an sparsity of the transform coefficients. The approximation in adaptive transform for signal representation. In order to find (7) does not take into account the coefficients that corresponds a good balance between graph signal representation benefits to λ (L) = 0 (i.e., the DC coefficients). Thus, (7) does not 0 and its coding costs, we introduce a new graph construction capture the variable cost of DC coefficients in cases where the approach that takes into consideration the above mentioned graph contains a variable number of connected components.
criteria.
However, in our work we ignore this cost as we impose that We pose the problem of finding the optimal graph as a ratethe graph is connected.
distortion optimization problem defined as It is also interesting to point out that there is a strong min D(L) + γ(R (L) + R (L)), (6) connection between (7) and (5). In fact, if we suppose that c G L∈RN×N µ = 0 and if we consider u as the only observation of the where D(L) is the distortion between the original signal signal x, then the second term of the log-likelihood in (5) is and the reconstructed one. Instead, the total coding rate is equal to −R (L). For this reason, we can say that the solution c composed of two representation costs, namely the cost of the of our optimization problem can be seen as an approximation signal transform coefficients R (L) and the cost of the graph of the KLT.
c 5 G with this purpose. Instead for w, even if we suppose that c 2 d d consecutive edges usually have similar values, we have no 5 c guarantees that w is smooth on G , since G is fixed and it is d d 3 a not adapted to the image signal. Therefore, in the second case b f a using a sparsity constraint is more appropriate for capturing b f the characteristics of the edge weight signal w.
1 To be complete, we finally note that the dual graph has e 4 e already been used in graph learning problems in the literature.
(a) (b) In particular, in [30] the authors propose a method for joint denoising and contrast enhancement of images using the graph Fig. 1. An example of a graph (a) and its corresponding dual graph (b). The Laplacian operator, where the weights of the graph are defined edges in the first graph (labeled with lower case letters) become the nodes of the corresponding dual graph. through an optimization problem that involves the dual graph.
Moreover, [31] presents a graph-based dequantization method C. Rate approximation of the graph description by jointly optimizing the desired graph-signal and the similarity graph, where the weights of the graph are treated as another The graph description cost R (L) depends on the method G graph signal defined on the dual graph. The approximation of that is used to code the graph. Generally, a graph could have R (L) presented in (8) may look similar to the one used in an arbitrary topology. However, in order to reduce the graph G [31]. The main difference between the two formulations is that transmission cost, we choose to use a fixed incidence matrix B in (8) we minimize the sparsity of w in the GFT domain in for the graph and to vary only the edge weights. Therefore, the graph can be defined simply by a vector w ∈ RM, where w order to lossy code the signal w; instead, in [31], the authors e minimize the differences between neighboring edges in order with 1 ≤ e ≤ M is the weight of the edge e. Then, by using (1) we can define the graph Laplacian L = BT diag(w)B. to optimize the graph structure without actually coding it.
In order to compress the edge weight vector w, we propose to treat it as a graph signal that lies on the dual graph G . Given d D. Graph construction problem a graph G, we define its dual graph G as an unweighted graph d By using (1), (7) and (8), our graph construction problem where each node of G represents an edge of G and two nodes d (6) is reduced to the following optimization problem of G are connected if and only if their corresponding edges d in G share a common endpoint. An example of a dual graph min u TB(diag(w))BT u + α(cid:107)ΨTw(cid:107) , (9) is shown in Fig. 1. We choose to use this graph representation d 1 w∈RM for the edge weight signal w because consecutive edges G where α is a weighting constant parameter, that allows us to often have similar weights, since the signals have often smooth balance the contribution of the two terms.
regions or smooth transitions between regions. The latter is Building on the rate-distortion formulation of (9), we design generally true in case of images. In this way, the dual graph the graph by solving the following optimization problem can provide a smooth representation of w. We can define the graph Laplacian matrix L d ∈ RM×M of the dual graph G d min u TB(diag(w))BT u + α(cid:107)ΨTw(cid:107) − β1 Tlog(w), d 1 and the corresponding eigenvector and eigenvalue matrices w∈RM (10) Ψ ∈ RM×M and Λ ∈ RM×M such that L = Ψ Λ ΨT. s. t. w ≤ 1, d d d d d d We highlight that, since G is an unweighted graph, it is d where α and β are two positive regularization parameters and independent of the choice of L, and by consequence also Λ d 1 denotes the constant one vector. The inequality constraint and Ψ are independent from L.
d has been added to guarantee that all the weights are in the Since w can be represented as a graph signal, we can range (0,1], which is the same range of the most common compute its GFT wˆ ∈ RM as normalized weighting functions [32]. Then, the logarithmic wˆ = ΨTw. term has been added to penalize low weight values and to d avoid the trivial solution. In addition, this term guarantees Therefore, we can use wˆ to describe the graph G and we that w > 0, ∀m, so that the graph is always connected.
m evaluate the cost of the graph description by measuring the A logarithmic barrier is often employed in graph learning coding cost of wˆ. It has been shown that the total bit budget problems [23]. In particular, it has further been shown that needed to code a vector is proportional to the number of nona graph with Gaussian weights can be seen as the result of a zero coefficients [29], thus we approximate the cost of the graph learning problem with a specific logarithmic barrier on graph description by measuring the sparsity of wˆ as follows the edge weights [23].
The problem in (10) can be cast as a convex optimization R (L) = (cid:107)wˆ(cid:107) = (cid:107)ΨTw(cid:107) . (8) G 1 d 1 problem with a unique minimizer. To solve this problem, we We highlight that we use two different types of approximations write the first term in the following form for R (L) and R (L), even if both of them are treated as c G u TB(diag(w))BT u = tr((BT uu TB)diag(w)) graph signals. This is due to the fact that the two signals have different characteristics. In the case of an image signal u, we = vec(BT uu TB)Tvec(diag(w)) impose that the signal is smooth over G, building the graph = vec(BT uu TB)TM w, diag 6 wˆ∗ wˆ∗ ,uˆ u Solve GL w∗ For each ∆ i , quan- r,∆ i Choose the best r,∆ i q Entropy coding Bitstream problem (11) tize wˆ∗ = ΨTw∗ ∆ by solving (12) d i Fig. 2. Block diagram of the proposed coding method for an input image u.
where tr(·) denotes the trace of a matrix, vec(·) is the vector- and the reduced vector wˆ∗, then we quantize wˆ∗ and code r r ization operator, and M ∈ RM 2×M is a matrix that converts it using the entropy coder described above. It is important to diag the vector w into vec(diag(w)). Then, we can rewrite problem underline that, since we perform a quantization of wˆ∗, the r (10) as reconstructed signal w˜∗ is not strictly equal to the original w∗ and its quality depends on the quantization step size used.
min vec(BT uu TB)TM w + α(cid:107)ΨTw(cid:107) − β1 Tlog(w), diag d 1 The graph described by w˜∗ is then used to define the GFT w∈RM transform for the image signal.
s. t. w ≤ 1.
Since it is important to find the best tradeoff between the (11) quality of the graph and its transmission cost, for each block in The problem in (11) is a convex problem with respect to the an image we test different quantization step sizes {∆ } i 1≤i≤Q variable w and can be solved via interior-point methods [33] for a given graph represented by wˆ∗. To choose the best r whose complexity is approximately O(M 3) (for the worst quantization step size, we use the following rate-distortion case).
problem min D(∆ ) + γ(R (∆ ) + R (∆ )), (12) V. GRAPH-BASED IMAGE COMPRESSION i c i G i i We now describe how the graph construction problem of where R (∆ ) is the rate of wˆ∗ , the coefficient vector wˆ∗ G i r,∆ r the previous section can be applied to block-based image i quantized with ∆ , and D(∆ ) and R (∆ ) are respectively i i c i compression. It is important to underline that the main goal the distortion and the rate of the reconstructed image signal of this section is to present an application of our framework.
obtained using the graph transform described by wˆ∗ . We r,∆ Therefore, we do not present an optimization of the full coding i point out that the choice of ∆ depends on the quantization i process, but we mainly focus on the transform block.
step size q used for the image transform coefficients uˆ. In As pointed out in the previous sections, given an image fact, at high bitrate (small q) we expect to have a smaller block u we have two different types of information to transmit ∆ and thus a more precise graph, instead at low bitrate i to the decoder: the transform coefficients of the image signal (large q) we will have a larger ∆ that corresponds to a i uˆ and the description of the graph wˆ. The image coefficients coarser graph approximation. We also underline that, in (12), uˆ are quantized and then coded using an entropy coder.
we evaluate the actual distortion and rate without using the Under the assumption of high bitrate, the optimal entropyapproximation introduced previously in (6), (7), (8). The actual constrained quantizer is the uniform quantizer [34]. Moreover, coding methods described above are used to compute the rates it has been proved that, under the assumption that all the R (∆ ) and R (∆ ). The principal steps of the proposed c i G i transform coefficients follow the same probability distribution, image compression method are summarized in Fig. 2.
the transform code is optimized when the quantization steps of all coefficients are equal [35]. For these reasons, we quantize A. Computational complexity the image transform coefficients uˆ using a uniform quantizer with the same step size q for all the coefficients. Then, since The proposed image compression method requires to comwe assume that the non-zero coefficients are concentrated pute, both at the encoder and at the decoder, the eigenvectors in the low frequencies, we code the quantized coefficients of the Laplacian matrix. The computational cost of this opuntil the last non-zero coefficient using an adaptive bitplane eration is approximately O(N 3), where we recall that N is arithmetic encoder [36] and we transmit the position of the the number of pixels in a block. Moreover, at the encoder it last significant coefficient. is also necessary to solve the optimization problem in (11), The graph itself is transmitted by its GFT coefficients vector whose complexity is at most O(M 3), where M is the number wˆ, which is quantized and then transmitted to the decoder of edges and, since we use a grid graph, M is lower than using an entropy coder. In order to reduce the cost of the 2 N. For this reason, the overall complexity of the proposed graph description, we reduce the number of elements in wˆ by image compression method is higher at the encoder than taking into account only the first M(cid:102) (cid:28) M coefficients, which at the decoder. This could be an advantage in asymmetric usually are the most significant ones, and setting the other applications, where the encoder may afford more complexity M − M(cid:102) coefficients to zero. The reduced signal wˆ ∈ RM(cid:102) is than the decoder. In Table I we show the execution times of the r quantized using the same step size for all its coefficients and proposed method for encoding and decoding an image block.
then coded with the same entropy coder used for the image We also perform a comparison with other three techniques, signal. namely the method proposed in [6], a baseline DCT coder Given an image signal, we first solve the optimization and a graph-based method where the graph is designed using problem in (11) obtaining the optimal solution w∗. To transmit a Gaussian weight function (see Section VI and VII for more w∗ to the decoder, we first compute its GFT coefficients wˆ∗ details on these methods). The execution time of the proposed 7 Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Fig. 3. Block classification of the image Lena. Class 1 contains smooth blocks, class 2 blocks with a dominant principal gradient, and class 3 consists of blocks with a more complex structure.
TABLE I the block. In smooth blocks nearly all the edges will have EXECUTION TIME COMPUTED USING AN INTEL CORE I 7 @ 4.7 GHZ similar values. Instead, in piecewise smooth blocks there could PROCESSOR.
be a small percentage of edges whose consecutive ones have Method Encoder Decoder significantly different values. Finally, in textured blocks this Proposed 2.36 s 4.10·10−3 s percentage may even increase in a significant way. For this DCT 6.95·10−4 s 6.15·10−4 s reason, we perform a priori a block classification using a [6] 3.55·10−2 s 1.10·10−3 s structure tensor analysis, as done in [18]. The structure tensor Gaussian 3.57·10−2 s 4.30·10−3 s is a matrix derived from the gradient of an image patch, and it is commonly used in many image processing algorithms, such as edge detection [37], corner detection [38], [39] and feature method at the encoder is higher than the other three methods, extraction [40]. Let µ and µ be the two eigenvalues of the this is probaby due to the fact that for the optimization problem 1 2 structure tensor, where µ ≥ µ ≥ 0. We classify the image we use a general purpose solver which is not optimized for 1 2 blocks in the following way: our specific problem. Instead, at the decoder we can see that the performance of the proposed method are comparable with • Class 1: smooth blocks, if µ 1 ≈ µ 2 ≈ 0; the ones of [6] and the Gaussian method. • Class 2: blocks with a dominant principal gradient, if µ (cid:29) µ ≈ 0; 1 2 Class 3: blocks with a more complex structure, if µ and VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON NATURAL IMAGES • 1 µ are both large.
2 In this section, we evaluate the performance of our illustra Fig. 3 shows an example of block classification. For each block tive graph-based encoder for natural images. We first describe class, we have set the values of parameters α and β by fine the general experimental settings, then we present the obtained tuning. We set α = 100 for blocks that belong to the first experimental results.
class, α = 500 for blocks that belong to the second class and α = 800 for blocks that belong to the third class. For all the A. Experimental setup three classes, we set the same value for the other optimization First of all, we subdivide the image into non-overlapping parameter, i.e., β = 1.
16×16 pixel blocks. For each block, we define the edge We compare the performance of the proposed method to a weights using the graph learning problem described in the baseline coding scheme built on the classical DCT transform.
previous sections. The chosen topology of the graph is a 4- In order to obtain comparable results, we code the transform connected grid: this is the most common graph topology for coefficients uˆ of the image signal using the same entropy coder graph-based image compression, since its number of edges for the graph-based method and for the DCT-based encoder.
is not too high, and thus the coding cost is limited. In In the first case, in addition to the bitrate of uˆ, we count the a 4-connected square grid with N nodes, we have M = bitrate due to the transmission of wˆ∗ and log Q additional √ √ i 2 N( N − 1) edges. In all our experiments on natural bits per block to transmit the chosen quantization step size images, we use Q = 8 possible quantization step sizes ∆ for ∆ for wˆ . We point out that we do not need to send any i i r wˆ and we set M(cid:102) = 64, which is the length of the reduced information about the block class, because this classification r coefficient vector wˆ . In order to set the value of the parameter is only needed at the encoder in order to define the parameters r α in (11), we first have to perform a block classification. In of the optimization problem (11). For both methods, we vary fact, we recall that the parameter α in (11) is related to the l - the quantization step size q of the transform coefficients to 1 norm of wˆ, where wˆ are the GFT coefficients of the signal w vary the encoding rates. In addition, in our method, for each that lies on the dual graph. As we have explained previously, block, we compare the RD-cost of the GFT and the one of the the motivation for using the dual graph is that consecutive DCT. Then, we eventually code the block with the transform edges usually have similar values. However, this statement that has the lowest RD-cost and we use 1 additional bit per is not always true, but it depends on the characteristics of block to signal if we are using the GFT or the DCT.
8 TABLE II BJONTEGAARD AVERAGE GAIN IN PSNR FOR NATURAL IMAGES W.R.T. DCT Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Total Learned Gaussian Learned Gaussian Learned Gaussian Learned Gaussian Image KLT KLT KLT KLT graph graph graph graph graph graph graph graph Lena 0.11 0.11 0.15 0.70 0.49 0.03 0.51 0.32 0.10 0.31 0.23 0.13 Boat 0.09 0.07 0.21 0.33 0.21 0.11 0.46 0.34 0.07 0.28 0.21 0.16 Peppers 0.18 0.14 0.44 0.87 0.45 0.25 0.88 0.57 0.10 0.47 0.31 0.37 House 0.05 0.05 0.07 0.68 0.59 0.11 0.61 0.49 0.01 0.36 0.31 0.08 Couple 0.26 0.29 0.07 1.17 0.75 0.04 0.98 0.81 0.04 0.66 0.55 0.06 Stream 0.17 0.19 0.18 0.50 0.30 0.01 0.31 0.22 0.13 0.31 0.23 0.13 Barbara 0.13 0.16 0.18 0.37 0.28 0.14 0.30 0.22 0.02 0.26 0.22 0.12 F 16 0.12 0.20 0.10 0.79 0.70 0.13 0.79 0.66 0.05 0.48 0.46 0.10 Female 0.14 0.15 0.12 1.22 0.84 0.06 1.14 0.88 0.07 0.55 0.46 0.11 Lake 0.12 0.19 0.50 0.25 0.08 0.28 0.60 0.46 0.17 0.43 0.37 0.32 In order to show the advantages of the proposed graph corresponds to smooth blocks, the gain is nearly 0, as DCT in construction problem, we compare our method with a classical this case is already optimal.
graph construction technique that uses a Gaussian weight We also notice that the method with the Gaussian graph alfunction [32] to define the edge weights ways outperforms the DCT. However, in the classes where the DCT is not optimal, the learned graph always provides better 2 W ij = e − (ui− σ2 uj) , performance. This shows that the proposed graph compression method in conjunction with a standard graph construction where σ is a gaussian parameter that we defined as σ = technique can still outperform the DCT, even if the graph 0.15 max |u − u |. In order to have comparable results, i,j i j is not optimized. On the other hand, these results show also we use the coding scheme described in Sec. V also for the that we can reach a higher level of performance if we build Gaussian graph.
the graph using the proposed graph learning method, which We compare the proposed method also with an approximais targeted for image compression and takes into account the tion of the KLT. We subdivide the image blocks into classes coding cost of both the image signal and the graph structure.
using the same block classification proposed above and for This highlights the importance of the proposed optimization each class we compute a separate KLT. In this way, the only problem.
auxiliary information that we have to send to the decoder is the Moreover, we can see that in the second and third class the class index. In order to have a fair comparison, the transform proposed graph-based method outperforms the KLT; instead coefficients are coded with the same coding scheme that we in the first class in some cases the KLT provides better have used for the other methods.
perfomance. This could be explained by the fact that we are using an approximation of the KLT that is the same for all the blocks that belong to a class. In fact, in some cases it B. Results could be important to have a transform that reflects the peculiar The experiments are performed on ten classical grayscale characteristics of the block that we are processing, especially images (House, Lena, Boat, Peppers, Stream, Couple, Stream, for blocks with sharp discontinuities or textured blocks.
Barbara, F 16, Female, Lake) [41]. This dataset contains dif Finally, we show in Figure 6 the percentage of bitrate ferent types of natural images, for example some of them dedicated to the graph transmission in function of the overall have smooth regions (e.g. House and Peppers), others instead bitrate. We can clearly see that the percentage of bitrate are more textured (e.g. Boat, Lena, Couple and Stream). In dedicated to the graph description increases as the bitrate Table II, we show the obtained performance results in terms decreases and the increase is steeper at very low bitrate.
of average gain in PSNR compared to DCT, evaluated through the Bjontegaard metric [42]. Moreover, in Fig. 4 we show C. Wavelet comparison the rate-distortion curves for the image Peppers. To visually understand the performance difference, in Fig. 5 we show a For natural image compression, coding scheme based on visual comparison between the DCT and the proposed method wavelets have achieved significantly better performance comfor the image Peppers. We see that, in the second and third pared to DCT-based compression methods [43]. Differently classes, the proposed method outperforms DCT providing an from the DCT, wavelets are usually applied on the whole imaverage PSNR gain of 0.69 d B for blocks in the second class age without subdividing the image into blocks. In this way, it is and 0.66 d B for blocks in the third class. It should be pointed possible to better exploit the spatial correlation of the pixels.
out that there is not a significant difference in performance Since in this paper we consider a block-based approach, a between the second class and the third one. This probably is comparison with wavelets would not provide a fair assessment due to the fact that the proposed graph construction method of the transform. For this reason, we decided to use as main is able to adapt the graph and its description cost to the benchmark the DCT. However, we also present a comparison characteristics of each block. Instead, in the first class, which between the proposed method and wavelets computed on a 9 50 45 40 35 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Peppers - class 1 50 45 40 DCT 35 Learned graph Gaussian graph KLT 30 1 2 3 4 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Peppers - class 2 DCT Learned graph Gaussian graph KLT 50 45 40 35 30 1 2 3 4 5 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Peppers - class 3 50 45 40 DCT Learned graph 35 Gaussian graph KLT 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Peppers - total DCT Learned graph Gaussian graph KLT Fig. 4. Rate-distortion curves for the image Peppers.
TABLE III TABLE IV BJONTEGAARD AVERAGE GAIN IN PSNR COMPARED TO WAVELETS. CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THEORETICAL AND ACTUAL BITRATES.
Block size Image 16×16 32×32 64×64 128×128 Image Peppers Lena Boat Stream Lake Peppers 1.98 1.13 0.67 0.08 Correlation 0.954 0.987 0.977 0.998 0.988 Boat 1.46 0.34 -0.23 -0.44 Stream 0.84 -0.30 -0.83 -0.98 Lake 1.45 0.72 0.35 0.15 rate approximation presented in Sec. IV.B and IV.C. In this case, we compare the theoretical total bitrate computed using approximation (7) and (8) with the actual one. Table IV shows few sample images. In this case, we consider wavelets defined the correlation coefficient of these two quantities for a few on blocks of different sizes. Table III shows the obtained sample images. For all the considered images, the correlation results. We evaluate the performance of the proposed method coefficient is close to one, showing that the rate approximation compared to wavelets. As we can see from the results, when provides a good estimate of the actual bitrate.
the dimension of the block is small, the proposed method show a significant quality gain. Instead, at larger block size wavelets VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON PIECEWISE SMOOTH often outperform the proposed method.
IMAGES In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed D. Validation of theoretical assumptions method on piecewise smooth images, comparing our method In this section, we examine to what extent the assumptions with classical DCT and the state-of-the-art graph-based coding used to derive the graph optimization problem (11) are valimethod of [6]. We first describe the specific experimental dated. The first assumption that we made is the approximation setting used for this type of signals, then we present the of the distortion presented in Sec. IV.A. In this case, we obtained results.
assume that the distortion depends only on the quantization step size. Figure 7 shows the theoretical distortion with respect A. Experimental setup to the quantization step size q compared to the actual one.
We can clearly see that, with small quantization step sizes We choose as piecewise smooth signals ten depth maps (i.e. high bitrate), the theoretical distortion converges to the taken from [44], [45]. Similarly to the case of natural images, actual one. This is an expected result since this approximation we split them into non-overlapping 16×16 pixel blocks and is valid only at high bitrate. Then, we also examine the the chosen graph topology is a 4-connected grid. In addition, 10 Original image DCT Proposed method Fig. 5. Visual comparison for a detail of the image Peppers at 0.6 bpp.
60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 bitrate (bpp) % 7 10 3.5 theoretical 3 DCT GFT 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0 10 20 30 40 total class 1 class 2 Fig. 7. Theoretical vs actual distortion with respect to the quantization step class 3 size q for the image Peppers. The corresponding DCT and GFT bitrates lie approximately between 0.5 bpp (for q = 40) and 3.8 bpp (for q = 3) for both transforms.
Teddy - class 1 Teddy - class 2 Fig. 6. Percentage of bitrate dedicated to graph transmission in function of the overall bitrate for the image Peppers.
Fig. 8. Block classification of the image Teddy.
we keep for Q the same setting as the one used for natural images. Then, to define the parameters α and β we again we use an adaptive binary arithmetic encoder to transmit a subdivide the image blocks into classes using the structure significance map that signals the non-zero coefficients. In this tensor analysis. In [6], the authors have identified three block way, we can use an adaptive bitplane arithmetic encoder to classes for piecewise smooth images: smooth blocks, blocks code only the values of the non-zero coefficients. This allows with weak boundaries (e.g., boundaries between different a strong reduction of the number of coefficients that we have parts of the same foreground/background) and blocks with to transmit to the decoder.
sharp boundaries (e.g., boundaries between foreground and Similarly to the case of natural images, we compare our backgound). In our experiments, since we have observed that method to a transform coding method based on the classical the first two classes have a similar behavior, we decided to DCT. However, in the specific case of depth map coding it has consider only two different classes: been shown that graph-based methods significantly outperform Class 1: smooth blocks and blocks with weak edges, if • the classical DCT. For this reason, we also propose a comµ ≈ µ ≈ 0.
1 2 parison with a graph-based coding scheme that is specifically Class 2: blocks with sharp edges, if µ (cid:29) 0, • 1 designed for piecewise smooth images. The method presented where µ and µ , with µ ≥ µ ≥ 0, are the two eigenvalues in [6] achieves the state-of-the-art performance in graph-based 1 2 1 2 of the structure tensor. An example of block classification is depth image coding. This method uses a table-lookup based shown in Fig. 8. As done for natural images, for each class graph transform: the most popular GFT s are stored in a lookup we set parameters α and β by fine tuning. For the first class, table, and then for each block an exhaustive search is perwe set α = 40 and β = 0.02. For the second class, we set formed to choose the best GFT in rate-distortion terms. In this α = 400 and β = 1. way, the side information that has to be sent to the decoder is With this type of signals, we have observed that the co- only the table index. Moreover, the method in [6] incorporates efficients wˆ∗ of the learned graph are very sparse, as shown a number of coding tools, including multiresolution coding in Fig. 9. For this reason, we decided to modify the coding scheme and edge-aware intra-prediction. Since in our case we method used for wˆ∗. As done for natural images, we reduce are interested in evaluating the performance of the transform, the number of elements in wˆ by taking into account only the we only focus on the transform part and we use as reference first M(cid:102) coefficients (in this case we set M(cid:102) = 256). Then, method a simplified version of the method in [6] that is similar 11 00..0000001133339999 00..005555997755 TABLE VI BJONTEGAARD AVERAGE GAIN IN PSNR BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND THE REFERENCE METHOD.
Image Class 1 Class 2 Total Teddy -0.87 -0.12 -0.38 Cones -1.21 1.17 0.54 Art -0.89 0.86 0.49 Dolls -0.78 1.16 0.26 Moebius -1.14 -0.47 -0.76 Reindeer -0.51 0.02 -0.33 Rocks -0.81 1.64 0.39 0.7 Cloth -0.89 2.26 0.65 0.6 Baby -0.66 0.04 -0.24 0.5 Aloe -1.40 1.73 0.95 0.4 $ w^i j j 0.3 TABLE VII 0.2 CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THEORETICAL AND ACTUAL BITRATES.
0.1 Image Teddy Cones Art Reindeer Aloe 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 Correlation 0.830 0.983 0.996 0.984 0.991 i Fig. 9. Top: Example of a piecewise smooth block and the corresponding learned graph. Bottom: The corresponding GFT coefficients wˆ.
11 shows an example of a decoded image obtained using the TABLE V BJONTEGAARD AVERAGE GAIN IN PSNR COMPARED TO DCT. proposed method.
The results show that the proposed technique provides Image Class 1 Class 2 Total Teddy 0.59 6.12 4.82 a significant quality gain compared to DCT, displaying a Cones 0.70 8.37 6.88 behavior similar to other graph-based techniques. Moreover, it Art 0.56 8.66 7.62 is important to highlight that the performance of the proposed Dolls 0.55 8.59 5.57 method are close to that of the state-of-the-art method [6], Moebius 0.82 7.36 5.52 although our method is not optimized for piecewise smooth Reindeer 0.45 8.34 5.75 images, but it is a more general method that can be applied to a Rocks 0.36 11.41 7.05 Cloth 0.48 11.91 7.22 variety of signal classes. In particular, for the blocks belonging Baby 0.20 10.18 8.03 to the second class, in 8 out of 10 images (namely Rocks, Aloe 0.29 9.16 7.75 Cloth, Baby, Aloe, Cones, Art, Dolls and Reindeer) we are able to outperform the reference method, reaching in some cases a quality gain larger than 1 d B (see Table VI). Overall, to the one used in [46]. The simplified version of [6] that we with our more generic compression framework, we outperform implemented employs 16×16 blocks and it does not make use the reference method in more than half of the test images. In of edge-aware prediction and multiresolution coding. Since the general, we observe that the proposed method outperforms transform used in [6] is based on a lookup table, we use 40 the reference one in blocks that have several edges or edges training depth images to build the table as suggested in [6].
that are not straight. This is probably due to the fact that, in In the training phase, we identify the most common graph these cases, it is more difficult to represent the graph using a transforms. As a result, the obtained lookup table contains lookup table. It is also worth noting that our method shows 718 transforms. Then, in the coding phase each block is coded better performance at low bitrate, as it is possible to see in using one of the transforms contained in the lookup table or Fig. 10.
the DCT. The coding method used for the table index is the As done in Section VI-D for natural images, we also persame as in [6]. Instead for the transform coefficients uˆ, in form a validation of the theoretical assumptions used to derive order to have comparable results, we use the coding method the graph optimization problem (11) for piecewise smooth described in Sec. V.
images. We first examine the approximation of the distortion presented in Section IV.A. Fig. 12 shows the theoretical and B. Results actual distortion with respect to the quantization step size q.
The first coding results on depth maps are summarized in We can observe that, at high bitrate (i.e., small quantization Table V, where we show the average gain in PSNR compared step size), the theoretical distortion converges to the actual one.
to DCT. Instead, in Table VI we show the Bjontegaard average Table VII shows the correlation between the actual bitrate and gain in PSNR between the proposed method and the reference the theoretical bitrate computed using (7) and (8). The results method described previously. Moreover, in Fig. 10 we show show that (7) and (8) provide a good estimate of the actual the rate-distortion curves for the image Dolls. Finally, Fig. bitrate for piecewise smooth images.
12 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Dolls - class 1 55 54 53 52 51 50 DCT 49 proposed method reference method 48 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Dolls - class 2 50 48 46 44 42 40 DCT 38 proposed method reference method 36 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 bitrate (bpp) )Bd( RNSP Dolls - total 54 52 Fig. 11. Top: Original image. Bottom: Decoded image using the proposed 50 method (0.6 bpp).
48 4 46 44 3 DCT 42 proposed method reference method 40 2 Fig. 10. Rate-distortion curves for the image Dolls.
1 VIII. CONCLUSION 0 In this paper, we have introduced a new graph construction 5 10 15 problem targeted for compression. The solution of the pro- q posed problem is a graph that provides an effective tradeoff between the energy compaction of the transform and the cost of the graph description. Then, we have also proposed an innovative method for coding the graph by treating the edge weights as a new signal that lies on the dual graph.
We have tested our method on natural images and on depth maps. The experimental results show that the proposed graph transform outperforms classical DCT and, in the case of depth map coding, even compares to the state-of-the-art graph-based coding method.
We believe that the proposed technique participates to opening a new research direction in graph-based image compression. As future work, it would be interesting to investigate D 6 ×10 theoretical DCT GFT Fig. 12. Theoretical vs actual distortion with respect to the quantization step size q for the image Teddy. The corresponding DCT and GFT bitrates lie approximately between 0.7 bpp (for q = 16) and 1.8 bpp (for q = 2.5) for DCT, and 0.6 bpp (for q = 16) and 1.5 bpp (for q = 2.5) for GFT.
other possible representation for the edge weights of the graph, such as graph dictionaries or graph wavelets. This may lead to further improvements in the coding performance of the proposed method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was partially supported by Sisvel Technology.
13 REFERENCES [25] D. Zhou and B. Scho¨lkopf, “A regularization framework for learning from graph data,” in Proc. ICML Workshop on Statistical Relational Learning and its Connections to other Fields, 2004, pp. 132–137.
[1] D. Shuman, S. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst, [26] C. Zhang and D. Floreˆncio, “Analyzing the optimality of predictive “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending hightransformcodingusinggraph-basedmodels,”IEEES ignal Process.Lett., dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 106–109, 2013.
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, 2013.
[27] H. Rue and L. Held, Gaussian Markov random fields: theory and [2] N. Ahmed, T. Natarajan, and K. Rao, “Discrete cosine transform,” IEEE applications. CRC Press, 2005.
Trans. Computers, vol. C-23, no. 1, pp. 90–93, 1974.
[28] R. M. Gray and D. L. Neuhoff, “Quantization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, [3] D. K. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval, “Wavelets on vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2325–2383, 1998.
graphs via spectral graph theory,” Applied and Computational Harmonic [29] S. Mallat and F. Falzon, “Analysis of low bit rate image transform Analysis, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 129–150, 2011.
coding,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Process., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1027–1042, [4] G.Shen,W.S.Kim,S.K.Narang,A.Ortega,J.Lee,and H.Wey,“Edge 1998.
adaptive transforms for efficient depth map coding,” in Proc. Picture [30] X. Liu, G. Cheung, and X. Wu, “Joint denoising and contrast en Coding Symposium (PCS), 2010, pp. 2808–2811.
hancement of images using graph laplacian operator,” in Proc. IEEE [5] W.Kim,S.K.Narang,and A.Ortega,“Graphbasedtransformsfordepth International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing video coding,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, (ICASSP), 2015, pp. 2274–2278.
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2012, pp. 813–816.
[31] W. Hu, G. Cheung, and M. Kazui, “Graph-based dequantization of [6] W. Hu, G. Cheung, A. Ortega, and O. C. Au, “Multiresolution graph block-compressed piecewise smooth images,” IEEE Signal Process.
fourier transform for compression of piecewise smooth images,” IEEE Lett., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 242–246, 2016.
Trans. on Image Process., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 419–433, 2015.
[32] L. J. Grady and J. Polimeni, Discrete calculus: Applied analysis on [7] G. Fracastoro, D. Thanou, and P. Frossard, “Graph transform learning graphs for computational science. Springer Science & Business Media, for image compression,” in Proc. Picture Coding Symposium (PCS), 2010.
2016, pp. 1–5. [33] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex optimization. Cambridge [8] K. Sayood, Introduction to data compression. Newnes, 2012. university press, 2004.
[9] V. K. Goyal, J. Zhuang, and M. Vetterli, “Transform coding with [34] T. Wiegand and H. Schwarz, Source coding: Part I of fundamentals of backward adaptive updates,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, source and video coding. Now Publishers Inc, 2010.
vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1623–1633, 2000. [35] S. Mallat, A wavelet tour of signal processing: the sparse way. Aca- [10] A. K. Jain, “A sinusoidal family of unitary transforms,” IEEE Transac- demic press, 2008.
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, no. 4, pp. 356–365, [36] I. H. Witten, R. M. Neal, and J. G. Cleary, “Arithmetic coding for data 1979. compression,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 520–540, [11] W.-T. Su, G. Cheung, and C.-W. Lin, “Graph fourier transform with neg- 1987.
ative edges for depth image coding,” ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1702.03105, [37] U. Ko¨the, “Edge and junction detection with an improved structure 2017. tensor,” in Joint Pattern Recognition Symposium. Springer, 2003, pp.
[12] W. Hu, G. Cheung, and A. Ortega, “Intra-prediction and generalized 25–32.
graph fourier transform for image coding,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., [38] C. Harris and M. Stephens, “A combined corner and edge detector.” in vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1913–1917, 2015. Alvey vision conference, vol. 15, no. 50. Manchester, UK, 1988, pp.
10–5244.
[13] H. E. Egilmez, A. Said, Y.-H. Chao, and A. Ortega, “Graph-based transforms for inter predicted video coding,” in Proc. IEEE International [39] C. S. Kenney, M. Zuliani, and B. Manjunath, “An axiomatic approach to Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2015, pp. 3992–3996. corner detection,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
CVPR 2005. IEEE Computer Society Conference on, vol. 1. IEEE, [14] H. E. Egilmez, Y.-H. Chao, A. Ortega, B. Lee, and S. Yea, “Gbst: 2005, pp. 191–197.
Separable transforms based on line graphs for predictive video coding,” [40] W. Fo¨rstner, “A feature based correspondence algorithm for image in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), matching,” International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sens 2016, pp. 2375–2379.
ing, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 150–166, 1986.
[15] K.-S. Lu and A. Ortega, “Symmetric line graph transforms for inter [41] USC-SIPI, “Image database, volume 3: Miscellaneous,” http://sipi.usc.
predictive video coding,” in Proc. Picture Coding Symposium (PCS), edu/database/database.php?volume=misc.
2016.
[42] G. Bjontegaard, “Calculation of average PSNR differences between RD- [16] G. Fracastoro and E. Magli, “Predictive graph construction for image curves,” Doc. VCEG-M 33 ITU-T Q 6/16, Austin, TX, USA, 2-4 April compression,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Image Pro 2001, 2001.
cessing (ICIP), 2015, pp. 2204–2208.
[43] D. Taubman and M. Marcellin, JPEG 2000 image compression fun- [17] E.Pavez,H.E.Egilmez,Y.Wang,and A.Ortega,“GTT:Graphtemplate damentals, standards and practice: image compression fundamentals, transforms with applications to image coding,” in Proc. Picture Coding standards and practice. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012, Symposium (PCS), 2015, pp. 199–203.
vol. 642.
[18] I. Rotondo, G. Cheung, A. Ortega, and H. E. Egilmez, “Designing [44] D. Scharstein and R. Szeliski, “High-accuracy stereo depth maps using sparse graphs via structure tensor for block transform coding of images,” structured light,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and in Proc. Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Pattern Recognition, vol. 1, 2003, pp. 195–202.
Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA), 2015, pp. 571–574.
[45] D. Scharstein and C. Pal, “Learning conditional random fields for [19] E. Pavez and A. Ortega, “Generalized laplacian precision matrix esstereo,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern timation for graph signal processing,” in Proc. IEEE International Recognition (CVPR), 2007, pp. 1–8.
Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016, [46] D. Zhang and J. Liang, “Graph-based transform for 2 d piecewise smooth pp. 6350–6354.
signals with random discontinuity locations,” IEEE Trans. on Image [20] H.E.Egilmez,E.Pavez,and A.Ortega,“Graphlearningfromdataunder Process., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1679–1693, 2017.
structural and laplacian constraints,” ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1611.05181, 2016.
[21] E. Pavez, H. E. Egilmez, and A. Ortega, “Learning graphs with monotone topology properties and multiple connected components,” ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1705.10934, 2017.
[22] X. Dong, D. Thanou, P. Frossard, and P. Vandergheynst, “Learning laplacian matrix in smooth graph signal representations,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 23, pp. 6160–6173, 2016.
[23] V. Kalofolias, “How to learn a graph from smooth signals,” in Proc.
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2016, pp. 920–929.
[24] J. Gallier, “Elementary spectral graph theory applications to graph clustering using normalized cuts: a survey,” ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1311.2492, 2013.