International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 169 – No.11, July 2017 Comparative Analysis of Software Development Methods between Parallel, V-Shaped and Iterative Suryanto Nugroho Sigit Hadi Waluyo Luqman Hakim Department of Information System Department of Information Department of Informatics STMIK Duta Bangsa Management Muhammadiyah University of Surakarta, Indonesia AMIK Taruna Probolinggo Malang Probolinggo, Indonesia Malang, Indonesia ABSTRACT determines a software that is produced according to a set time and has a good quality.
Any organization that will develop software is faced with a difficult choice of choosing the right software development System Development Life Cycle or SDLC is a methodology method. Whereas the software development methods used, used to perform software development. The concept of the play a significant role in the overall software development SDLC is composed of several stages starting from the process. Software development methods are needed so that planning stage, the analysis phase, the design stage, the the software development process can be systematic so that it implementation stage and up to the system maintenance is not only completed within the right time frame but also period. Different forms of software development models that must have good quality. There are various methods of currently exist in building a framework or framework are software development in System Development Lyfe Cycle based on the concept of SDLC. According to Rainer, Turban, (SDLC). Each SDLC method provides a general guiding line and Potter [9], SDLC is a structured framework that contains about different software development and has different following processes in which the system is developed.
characteristics. Each method of software development has its Choosing the right software development model allows drawbacks and advantages so that the selection of software software developers to set development strategies. Each development methods should be compatible with the capacity SDLC model has advantages and disadvantages to being of the software developed. This paper will compare three considered when we are going to develop a software because different software development methods: V-Shaped Model, of the influence of the model's characteristics. For that, we Parallel Development Model, and Iterative Model with the need to compare the SDLC model before we determine the aim of providing an understanding of software developers to usage of the SDLC model. In this paper, we will examine the choose the right method.
model of SDLC V-Shaped Model, Parallel Model, and Iterative Model.
General Terms Software Development Comparison, Software Engineering 2. BASIC THEORY Keywords 2.1 Software Iterative Model, Parallel Development Model, System According to Laudon and Laudon [6] argue that software is Development Life Cycle, V-Shaped Model. 1. Command that when executed gives function and work as desired.
1. INTRODUCTION 2. Data structures that allow programs to manipulate The development of information technology has made a new information proportionately.
era in human life. As a result of the development of 3. Documents that describe the information and usefulness informatics that people use software on every social activity of the program.
can be said software become one part of modern human Meanwhile, according to Pressman [8] software is an civilization. Pressman [8] argues that software becomes a tool instruction that when executed produce the desired function in decision making in the contemporary business world, and results. The software also means data structures that can besides software, also serves as the basis of business services manipulate information that have been made in the form of information systems to Of the two definitions above we can conclude that the support business processes, such as transportation systems, software is a command that if executed will get results by the medical, telecommunications, industry, and entertainment. wishes of users. The software is more logical than the physical system element. Therefore, according to Currently, an organization depends heavily on software Sommerville [10], software should have the following because of the development of information technology.
characteristics: Software developed by the organization serves to assist in 1. Maintainability, the Software must be able to meet performing a complex business process becomes easier, faster changing needs.
and efficient, also the results of data processing through the 2. Dependability, Software must be reliable.
software more accurate than the computer manually.
3. Efficiency, Software must be efficient in resource usage.
Software-dependent organizations must develop software, but 4. Usability, Software must be used as planned.
each agency is faced with the difficulty of determining which 2.2 Software Engineering software development method to use. Software development In the opinion of Pressman [8], software engineering is the processes play a significant role in the overall software process of making using the principles of engineering development process; the software development method also expertise to obtain a software that is economical, reliable and 7 International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 169 – No.11, July 2017 can work efficiently. While Sommerville [10] argues that develop software. This is often regarded as part of the system software is a law that deals with the engineering of all aspects development life cycle. Each software development process is of making software from the system specification stage to the divided into several sound stages that allow a software stage of system maintenance after going through the system development company to manage the work efficiently to build usage stage.
software products from the required functionality within a Of the two definitions above software engineering can be particular time frame and budget. All software projects interpreted as a principle in the manufacture of software through the stages of requirements collection, business ranging from the system specification stage to the stage of analysis, system design, implementation, and quality system maintenance to obtain software that is economical, assurance testing [5] reliable and efficient.
3. DISCUSSION 2.3 System Development Life Cycle System Development Life Cycle or SDLC is a method by 3.1 SDLC Phase which software can be systematically developed and will The SDLC development framework provides a sequence of increase the likelihood of completing software projects within activities for system designers and developers to follow to the time limit and maintaining the quality of software develop software. There are five stages in software products as per the standards. development using SDLC, namely: planning, analysis, design, The SDLC development framework provides a sequence of implementation, and maintenance.
activities for system designers and developers to follow to Figure 1: SDLC Phase A. System Planing The next stage is the application of the implementation of the The planning stage in software development emphasizes more design of the previous stages and test. In the implementation, on the feasibility study aspect. Activities include: the following activities are carried out: 1. Establish and consolidate the development team. 1. Creation of the database according to the design scheme.
2. Determine the purpose and scope of development. 2. Creation of applications based on system design.
3. Identify the problems that exist in system development. 3. Testing and repairing the application (debugging).
4. Detect and evaluate strategies to be used in system development. E. System Maintenance 5. Determination of technology priority scale and application Performed by the designated admin to keep the system selection. capable of operating properly through the system's ability to adapt itself as needed.
B. System Analysis As for the implementation of SDLC, there are various In the analysis phase, the developer will perform the methodologies that can be used. The use of the method will following activities vary depending on the emphasis, whether on business 1. Conduct literature studies to find a similar case of existing processes or business support data.
research that can be handled by the system.
2. Brainstorming in the developer team on which case is 3.2 Software Development Method most appropriately modeled with the system.
Software development methods are needed so that the 3. Classifying problems, solutions, and opportunities that software development process can be systematic so that it is can be solved with the system.
not only completed within the right time frame but also must 4. Creating analysis and needs of the system.
have good quality.
Sommerville [10] argues that the software development C. System Design method is a representation of the software process. Each At this stage, features and operations of the system are development method represents a software development described in detail. Activities were undertaken are: process from a particular point of view.
1. Analyze the interaction of objects and functions on the The software development process model differs from the system.
software development methodology. According to Boehm [3], 2. Analyze data and create the database schema.
a method controls through a stage (data specification, 3. Designing user interface.
allocation of needs, control, etc.), while the model has an interest in providing guidance in a certain order (several steps) D. System Implementation 8 International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 169 – No.11, July 2017 in carrying out the tasks that need to be done to complete a 3.4 V-Shaped Model project software.
V-Shaped Model called by Balaji and Murugaiyan [2] "verification and validation model" is a modified version of 3.3 Comparison of Software Development the Waterfall model. Unlike Waterfall, this one model is not Methods designed linearly. If in the waterfall model the process is run Comparison of software development methods is done to linearly, then in V-model the process is done branched.
determine the characteristics of each software development Software development process in V-Shaped Model depends process to facilitate software developers choose the model on verification in the previous stage. In V-Shaped Model according to their needs. There are three models compared to gives the relationship between each development stage and this paper: V-shaped model, parallel model, and iterative Testing stage.
model.
Figure 2: V-Shaped Model 3. The software was developed during the implementation Excess of V-Shaped Model phase so that no initial prototype of the software was In the opinion of Munassar and Govardhan [7], V Shaped produced Model has advantages such as: 4. This model does not provide a clear solution to the 1. Straightforward and easy to use. problems found during the testing phase.
2. Each stage has a certain result.
3.5 Parallel Model 3. The chance to succeed is higher than the waterfall model In the opinion of Ajah and Ugah [1], this model tries to because the test is done from the beginning overcome the long time interval between the period of 4. This model is well used for software projects on a small analysis and delivery of the system. A general design for the scale whole system is done, and then the project is divided into a Lacks of V-Shaped Model series of different sub-projects that can be developed and While the shortcomings of V-Shaped Model in the opinion of implemented in parallel. This model tries to overcome the Munassar and Govardhan [7] are: weaknesses in the waterfall model so that the concept is made 1. Very rigid as waterfall model.
after all subprojects are perfect, then the final integration is 2. Flexibility is minimal and when will adjust difficult and done so that delivery is done to the system.
expensive 9 International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 169 – No.11, July 2017 Figure 3: Parallel Model 1. System integration has its difficulties. Failure or delay in Excess of Parallel Model one subproject impacts the process of integrating the Ajah and Ugah [1] argue that the excess parallel model is the entire system, time required for system delivery is shorter when compared to 2. There is a possibility of difficulty in handling if there is a the waterfall because some stages have been made in parallel problem in the subproject simultaneously.
form thus reducing the duration of time.
Lacks of Parallel Model 3.6 Iterative Model In the opinion of Ajah and Ugah [1] the parallel shortcomings According to Munassar and Govardhan [7] problems that of the model are: occur in the waterfall model create demand for software 1. Just like the waterfall design, this model also could not be development models that can deliver faster results, require separated from problems caused by long system delivery.
less information, and offer greater flexibility.
2. Sometimes subprojects are not independent; this is With an iterative design, a project is divided into small parts; because the design decision is made in one This allows the development team to show the results of 3. subproject may affect others.
previous processing and gain valuable feedback from users of 4. The end of the project may involve significant integration the system. Often, each iteration is a mini-Waterfall process challenges.
with feedback from one stage and providing necessary 5. Not suitable for complex projects and necessary software information for the next stage.
While Budi, Siswa, and Abijono [4] added the shortcomings of the parallel model are: Figure 4: Iterative Model 10 International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 169 – No.11, July 2017 software development methodology component consists of Excess of Iterative Model models, tools (Tools), and procedures. No model really suits In the opinion of Budi et al. [4] the advantages of iterative all types of organizations, so it takes a further approach to models are as follows: choosing which model is most appropriate to apply to a particular group.
1. Feedback can be done continuously from the project owner. 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We express gratitude to God Almighty, Parents, Family, PJJ 2. Some of the revisions to all specific applications and Aptikom Batch 5 and friends who helped and support so that functions.
this work can be completed.
3. Work in software development delivered at the beginning of the project 6. REFERENCES [1] Ajah, I. A., & Ugah, J. O. Comparative Analysis of Lacks of Iterative Model Software Development Methodologies. International Lacks of iterative modifications include: Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and 1. Although not necessarily a problem for all projects, since Software Engineering, 3(6), 2013 minimal initial planning before coding and implementation begins, when using the iteration model, it [2] Balaji, S., & Murugaiyan, M. S. WATEERFALLV s Vis possible that unexpected problems in the design or MODEL Vs AGILE: A COMPARATIVE STUDY ON system architecture will arise within the project. SDLC. International Journal of Information Technology Completing this could have potentially disastrous effects and Business Management, 2(1), 2012.
on the overall project time and cost of the project, which [3] Boehm B., “A spiral model of software development and require many future iterations just to solve one problem.
enhancement,” IEEE Computers, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 612. Unlike the waterfall model, which emphasizes almost all 72, 1988.
user involvement in the early stages of the project, [4] Budi, D. S., Siswa, T. A. Y., & Abijono, H. Analisis repetitive models often require user engagement Pemilihan Penerapan Proyek Metodologi Pengembangan throughout the entire process, as each new iteration will Rekayasa Perangkat Lunak. TEKNIKA, 5(1), 2016.
likely require testing and feedback from users to evaluate the necessary changes.
[5] Klopper, R., Gruner, S., & Kourie, D. Assessment of a framework to compare software development 4. CONCLUSION methodologies. Paper presented at the The 2007 Annual From comparison to 3 (three) method above, can be Research Conference of the South African Institute of concluded as follows: Computer Scientists and Information Technologists on IT Research in Developing Countries, 2007.
1. V-Shaped Model is easy to use but rigid as waterfall model, But the chance of software development success [6] Laudon, K. C., & Laudon, J. P. Management Information using shaped model is bigger when compared with Systems Managing The Digital Firm (13 ed.). Essex: waterfall model.
Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
2. The time used by the parallel model in the system delivery [7] Munassar, N. M. A., & Govardhan, A. A Comparison is shorter than the waterfall model Between Five Models Of Software Engineering. IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 7(5), 3. The iterative design requires assistance from users for all 2010.
stages of system development.
[8] Pressman, R. S. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's 4. In v-shaped models and iterative models, the cost of Approach: Mc Graw-Hill Higher Education, 2001.
system development is more expensive than the waterfall model.
[9] Rainer, R. K., Turban, E., & Potter, R. E. Introduction to information systems (2 nd ed.): J. Wiley, 2009.
5. The project owner's iterative model can perform continuous feedback.
[10] Sommerville, I.. Software Engineering (7 th Edition): Pearson Addison Wesley, 2004.
It can be concluded that the success of software development depends on the overall management of software projects. The IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org 11