The 7 th International Conference on the Theory Diagrams are very wide-ranging and open-ended representations that include sketches, drawings, charts, pictures, 2 D and 3 D geometric models, and maps. Diagrams are a vital tool in human communication in areas such as art and science, as well as commerce and industry. Increased understanding of how effective diagrams can be generated and used has the potential to produce transformative advances in these areas. Research topics include understanding diagrammatic reasoning in humans; understanding the use of diagrammatic representation for communication; developing techniques for automated diagrammatic reasoning; and designing tools for use of diagrammatic representations.
The goal of the Diagrams 2012 Graduate Symposium is twofold. Firstly, the Symposium will provide senior graduate students and recent graduates with the opportunity to present their research and receive feedback from established researchers who will provide comments on each of the presentations. Secondly, the Symposium will provide students with an opportunity to network with each other as future colleagues. The doctoral student symposium will increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student researchers in these areas, and train them by providing early input and feedback from senior researchers in the field in an interactive and constructive environment.
Organising Committee General Chair Peter Rodgers (University of Kent, UK) Joint Program Chairs Phil Cox (Dalhousie University, Canada) Beryl Plimmer (University of Auckland, NZ) Tutorials Chair Gem Stapleton (University of Brighton, UK) Workshops Chair Nathaniel Miller (University of Northern Colorado, USA) Graduate Symposium Chair Lisa Best (The University of New Brunswick, Canada) Publicity Chair Aidan Delaney (University of Brighton, UK) 2 Table of Contents 1) Ozge Alacam……………………………………………………………………………………..5 Work in Progress: Annotating Gestures in Communication through Graphs 2) Farrukh Arslan Purdue University, USA) ……………………………………………8 Classification Tree Diagrams in Health Informatics Applications 3) Andrew Blake (University of Brighton, UK)………………………………………..11 What Makes an Effective Euler Diagram?
4) Luke Mac Neill (University of New Brunswick, Canada)……………………….14 The Serial Colour (SECO) Profile : A Colour Based Form of Graphical Representation 5) Gorkem Pacaci (Uppsala University, Sweden)…………………………………….17 Towards a visual compositional relational programming methodology 6) Alistair Stead (University of Cambridge, UK)……………………………………..20 A Sketch Recogniser as a Virtual Machine 8) Peter Vivian (Coventry University, UK)……………………………………………..23 Enhanced vector diagrams for illustrating elementary mechanics 4 Work in Progress: Annotating Gestures in Communication through Graphs Özge Alaçam, Cengiz Acartürk Cognitive Science Program, Informatics Institute, Middle East Technical University, 06800, Ankara/Turkey {ozge.alacam, acarturk}@metu.edu.tr Abstract. This work in progress study presents a syntactic-level analysis of gestures in communication through annotated line graphs in time domain. As distinct from the gesture analysis at discourse level, the syntactic gesture analysis is based on solely physical properties of the gestures, such as direction, size or position. The results revealed strong relationship between gestures, verbal descriptions and graphical annotations.
Keywords. Multimodal communication, syntactic gesture annotation, graph gesture interaction 1 Introduction Graphs and diagrammatic representations are widely used means of visual communication. In addition to graphical representations, communication is also achieved by the contribution of other modalities, such as gestures. For annotating gestures, one of the mostly preferred methods in the literature is proposed by Mc Neil and Levy [1]. According to this method, there are four main categories of gestures: beats, deictic, iconic and metaphoric. However, depending on the context, one gesture can belong to more than one category, and this complicates the coding procedure thus increasing the subjectivity. In order to address this issue, Mc Neill emphasized another method called “Dimensional Framework” [1], which claims that each gesture may have loading for each gesture property. So, a gesture can be multidimensional and the saliency of the dimensions is of the interest. Moreover, adding syntactic level of analysis prior to discourse analysis mentioned above is another method for gesture annotation. At the syntactic level, gestures are analyzed according to their physical properties, such as direction and size. However, gesture and spoken language are distinct forms of communication and these methods are generally engineered for the purpose of gesture-language interaction analysis. On the other hand, the analysis method for gesture–graph interaction should benefit from the shared physical properties based on spatial information carried by both modalities. One of the studies, in which this method (syntactic and discourse level analysis respectively) is employed, was conducted by Acarturk and Alacam [2]. The secondary results of the study indicated that for the evaluation of gesture - graph interaction, the syntactic level seems more informative than the discourse-level analysis that suffers from ambiguity. Regarding this issue, our research interest is to investigate whether a significant relationship can be obtained between the information conveyed in different modalities. The analysis has been performed at a syntactic level based on solely physical properties of gestures.
2 Pilot Study Seven participants (university students or teaching assistants) participated in the study. The experiment was conducted in the native language of all the participants (Turkish). The participants were asked to present single-sentence verbal descriptions of annotated graphs to a hypothetical audience. Participants’ spontaneous gestures for 14 annotated population-graphs of bird species 5 were video-recorded. Three types of annotations were used: process annotation, durative state annotation and punctual state annotation (Fig.1).
Fig. 1. Sample annotated graphs with a process annotation (left), a punctual state annotation (middle), and a durative state annotation (right) Syntactic Gesture Annotation. The coding scheme based on syntactic features was employed by using The Noldus Observer XT. Each gesture was classified in terms of its directionality: no direction, vertical/diagonal, horizontal, or other. Then the coder identified the following features of each gesture: size, palm direction, speed and start position. In the present study, we focus on directionality of the gestures by leaving the analysis of other features to a further study.
Spoken Language Transcription. The sentences produced by the participants were transcribed and then the parts of the sentences with accompanying gestures were segmented into phrases. After this process, the phrases were classified into five categories: time, state, process, durative and other. The time category covers phrases with temporal information, such as “between 1990 and 2010”. The phrases that refer to particular information in the graph, such as a peak, were classified as state. The verbs or nouns that point out the change in the population, such as an increase or a decrease formed the process category., The durative category covers the verbs or nouns that refer a stable duration in population. Finally, the remaining phrases, such as the species of the bird or their location were evaluated under the other category.
3 Findings The interactions between the pairs of modalities were analyzed separately and Mc Nemar tests were conducted to investigate the relationships. The syntactic analysis of the gestures based on physical features revealed significant associations with other modalities. Table 1 presents a cooccurrence matrix for three-way interaction between the modalities.
6 Conclusion 4 The results point out that durative graphical annotations yield more horizontal gestures and the utterance of the words like “being stable”. On the other hand, more vertical/diagonal movements were produced by the participants when describing graphs with process annotations. Additionally, the co-occurrence matrix reveals that verbal descriptions that refer to time or to population, which are accompanied by punctual annotations, are usually not accompanied by directional gestures. These results reveal that syntactic-level analysis of annotations is promising in revealing the interactions between language, gesture and graphical annotations. We state that the annotation method that focuses on syntactic features is not trivial, due to their possible contribution in corpus design regarding gesture modality. In addition, it may also have an important role in decreasing the subjectivity in coding process, since the syntactic features consist of discrete categories that reduce the level of ambiguity for spatial information.
5 References 1. Mc Neill, D.: Gesture and thought: University of Chicago Press. (2005).
2. Acarturk, C., Alacam, O.: Gestures in communication through line graphs. Proceedings of the 34 th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Sapporo, Japan: Cognitive Science Society. (to appear) 7 Classification Tree Diagrams in Health Informatics Applications Farrukh Arslan Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA farslan@purdue.edu Abstract. Health informatics deal with the methods used to optimize the acquisition, storage and retrieval of medical data, and classify information in health-care applications. Healthcare analysts are particularly interested in various computer informatics areas such as; knowledge representation from data, anomaly detection, outbreak detection methods and syndromic surveillance applications. Although various parametric and non-parametric approaches are being proposed to classify information from data, classification tree diagrams provide an interactive visualization to analysts as compared to other methods. In this work we discuss application of classification tree diagrams to classify information from medical data in healthcare applications.
Keywords: classification tree, anomaly detection, knowledge representation 1 Introduction Medical data in health informatics applications contains patient locations, temporal component (patient’s date of visit), syndrome classifications to various categories by ICD codes for time series analysis. Data also comprises age and gender of the individuals and text-field collected patient complaints for outbreak assessment [1]. Domain experts and healthcare analysts are often interested to classify information from medical data for further analysis and exploration. By analyzing extracted information from data, high incidence of events, anomalies or hotspots can be detected and mitigative measures can be taken for prevention.
Most information extraction methods rely on either parametric statistical formulation such as change-point or non-statistical formulation such as decision or classification tree [2]. The decision tree classifiers are constructed for datasets by using the training data over relatively long timeframes. In a decision tree, each internal node involves some test on one or more attributes, while the leaf nodes provide the potential decision information. Traversing the tree from the root to each leaf node, relevant information patterns can be identified and further analyzed by domain experts.
Classification tree diagrams are simple to interpret by domain experts and provide information visualization. Classifications are robust in a sense that there is no assumption made about underlying distribution of data and aprior distribution needs not to be known before building a classification tree diagram.
2 Medical Data in Health Informatics Emergency department data can be used for evaluating algorithms and methods, analyzing multivariate patterns and attribute relationships thereby extracting useful information. Medical data, stored in a relational database is shown in table 1. This data comprises chief complaints which are noted at the emergency department prior to the patient seeing a doctor. Relational medical database also includes patient’s home addresses (longitude, latitude) and demographic attributes (age, 8 gender).
Table 1. Medical dataset stored in a relational database. Following HIPPA regulations, patient and hospital names have been replaced by ID’s. Patient’s address is represented by longitude and latitude.
3 Classification Tree Diagram Induction A classification tree diagram [2] represents a structured binary tree which performs a split test in its internal nodes based on some or more attribute values and predicts decision in its leaf node.
Classification trees are built by recursive partitioning. The ultimate goal of classification tree induction algorithm is to end up with the smallest tree and purest leaf nodes i.e. further splitting would not increase information gain. The goal of building a classification tree structure is to have leaf nodes where all the attributes in it are correctly classified, maximizing the information gain.
Each leaf node in a tree is associated with a class. In anomaly detection methods [3], this would indicate if and where an anomaly is present in the dataset while traversing from root. Anomalies that are addressed by classification trees are the patterns in data that do not conform to normal semantic relationships between attributes. Each non-terminal node is associated with one of the attributes that domain rules possess. Each branch is associated with a particular value that the attribute of its parent node can take in dataset. Attribute discrimination is done by calculating Information gain and Entropy.
If an experiment has n possible outcomes then the amount of information I, expressed as bits is defined to be entropy, where pi is the prior probability of the ith outcome. The information gain for an attribute ‘A’ when used with a set of domain rules X is given below.
Tree diagram resulting from data classification is shown in figure 1. Gender and age attributes shows semantic relationships with complaints/syndromes. For example, elevated blood pressure complaint is related to age factor greater than 35 and elevated blood sugar with age between 11 and 17. Such semantic patterns would be of particular interest for healthcare analysts while exploring records for outbreak assessment. As a future work diagrams can be extended for multiclass knowledge extraction with spatio-temporal patterns spanning over multiple domains.
9 Fig. 1. Diagram shows age/gender based attributes classification from medical data. Traversing the tree from the root to each leaf node, semantic patterns can be analyzed.
4 Future Work Classification trees diagrams can be further extended to explore temporal anomalies in time series data, spanning over multiple spatio-temporal domains.
5 References 1. Maciejewski, R., Hafen, R., Rudolph, S., Tebbetts, G., Cleveland, W., Grannis, S., Ebert, D.: Generating synthetic syndromic surveillance data for evaluating visual analytics techniques. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications 29, 18-28 (2009) 2. Breiman, L., Freidman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., Stone, C. J.: Classification and Regression Trees.
Wadsworth, CA, (1984) 3. Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., Kumar, V.: Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 41(3), 1–58 (2009) 10 What Makes an Effective Euler Diagram?
Andrew Blake 1, Gem Stapleton 1, Peter Rodgers 2, and John Howse 1 1 University of Brighton, Brighton, UK {A.L.Blake,G.E.Stapleton,John.Howse}@brighton.ac.uk 2 University of Kent, Canterbury, UK P.J.Rodgers@kent.ac.uk Abstract. Euler diagrams can be an effective representation of information when they are both wellmatched and well-formed. However, being well-matched and well-formed alone does not imply effectiveness. Other diagrammatical properties need to be considered. Information visualisation theorists have known for some time that orientation, shape and colour have the potential to effect our interpretation of diagrams. This paper explains why well-matched, well-formed drawing principles are insufficient, illustrates why we should study the orientation, shape and colour of Euler diagrams, and briefly describes our research approach for this endeavor.
1 Introduction Euler diagrams represent set theoretic relationships using interconnected closed curves often drawn using circles or ovals. Curves are labelled, so affording context to the information or data therein. Figure 1 contains three Euler diagrams, all representing the same information, and illustrates there are syntactic choices to be made when using Euler diagrams to visualise data. Each diagram tells us that Course Leaders are a subset of Lecturers, Lecturers are a subset of Academics, and these staff could be Managers. Later in the paper we will discuss the syntactic differences between the diagrams in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Staff Hierarchy Euler diagrams are regarded a natural and effective way to depict sets and their relationships.
They are found in a wide variety of contexts including architecture, arts and social media. Wilkinson [9] presents a survey of natural science journals and online affiliated content from 2009 observing 72 occurrences of Euler diagrams. To support their use in information visualisation, various researchers have devised automated drawing techniques. Set Visualiser [7] and Vennmaster[1] are examples of software development projects that automatically draw Euler diagrams. It is essential that automatically generated Euler diagrams convey information accurately. Given the importance of accuracy and the variety of contexts in which Euler diagrams are used it is necessary to understand what makes an effective choice of diagram to represent any given data set. Having this understanding will inform the development of these tools and guide users towards drawing effective Euler diagrams.
11 Fig. 2. Staff hierarchy 2 Effective Euler Diagrams We will focus on two categories of so-called well-matched and well-formed drawing principles.
These are designed to yield effective diagrams where effective means reducing the average time taken to interpret them. Gurr [2], theorising well-matched diagrams, postulates that the most effective diagram is one with structure and property that matches, or closely matches, that which it strives to represent. Well-formedness describes relationships between curves and regions in a diagram. Rodgers et al. [6] empirically test these well-formedness properties observing the extent to which they impact comprehension. Gurr’s theory tell us to select well-matched diagrams and Rodgers et al.’s empirical work guides us to select well-formed diagrams.
In figure 1, d 1 is neither well-matched or well-formed. It is not well-matched as its shaded region denotes that there are no Course Leaders that are not Lecturers: the set of Course Leaders is contained by the set of Lecturers but CL is not contained by L. It is not wellformed as it has a disconnected zone: the region inside A and L but outside CL comprises two disconnected pieces. The diagram d 2 is well-matched but not well-formed. It is not well-formed as it has a disconnected zone, as described earlier, and a brushing point where CL meets L. The diagram d 3 is both wellmatched and well-formed. It does not exhibit any extraneous properties and the relationship between its curves and regions are neither disconnected or brushing and, therefore, it is regarded as the most effective at conveying information pertaining to staff hierarchy. There are a number of other well-formedness conditions that a diagram can exhibit. One example is concurrency which exists when two or more curve segments follow the same path [6].
3 Research Problems In addition to well-matched and well-formed, there are other diagrammatical properties to consider when ascertaining the effectiveness of a visual representation. For example, perceptual theorists know that we are sensitive to the diagrammatical properties of orientation, shape and colour [8]. Aware of this phenomena, information visualisation theorists manipulate these properties, affecting our interpretation and, thus, comprehension of diagrams [3].
Figure 2 represents the same information as figure 1. Diagrams d 3, d 4, d 5 and d 6 are all wellmatched and well-formed and, by this property, regarded equally effective. However, there are clear visual differences between them which can be largely attributed to the shape of their curves.
Diagram d 3 uses circles, diagrams d 4 and d 5 use ellipses, and diagram d 6 uses irregular shapes.
Diagrams d 4 and d 5 are identical but diagram d 5 has been rotated -38 degrees. Diagrams d 3 to d 6 visually illustrate that well-matched well-formed drawing principles alone are too naive in yielding effective Euler diagrams. Conscious that other diagrammatical properties affect our interpretation of diagrams this research is aiming to ascertain the extent to which orientation, shape and colour impact our comprehension of Euler diagrams. For example, which diagram is more 12