A Synthetic Network Generator for Covert Network Analytics Amr Elsisya,b, Aamir Mandviwallaa,b, Boleslaw K. Szymanskia,b,∗, Thomas Sharkeyb,c a Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA b Network Science and Technology Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA c Industrial and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA Abstract We study social networks and focus on covert (also known as hidden) networks, such as terrorist or criminal networks. Their structures, memberships and activities are illegal. Thus, data about covert networks is often incomplete and partially incorrect, making interpreting structures and activities of such networks challenging. For legal reasons, real data about active covert networks is inaccessible to researchers. To address these challenges, we introduce here a network generator for synthetic networks that are statistically similar to a real network but void of personal information about its members. The generator uses statistical data about a real or imagined covert organization network. It generates randomized instances of the Stochastic Block model of the network groups but preserves this network organizational structure. The direct use of such anonymized networks is for training on them the research and analytical tools for finding structure and dynamics of covert networks. Since these synthetic networks differ in their sets of edges and communities, they can be used as a new source for network analytics. First, they provide alternative interpretations of the data about the original network. The distribution of probabilities for these alternative interpretations enables new network analytics. The analysts ∗Corresponding author Email address: szymab@rpi.edu (Boleslaw K. Szymanski) Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 12, 2020 0202 gu A 01 ]IS.sc[ 1 v 54440.8002:vi Xra can find community structures which are frequent, therefore stable under perturbations. They may also analyze how the stability changes with the strength of perturbation. For covert networks, the analysts can quantify statistically expected outcomes of interdiction. This kind of analytics applies to all complex network in which the data are incomplete or partially incorrect.
Keywords: Social networks, Random weighted network generator, Network structure stability, Covert networks, Hierarchical networks 1. Introduction The randomized generation of synthetic networks is often used for testing which properties of a given network depend on its structure and features (Barabási et al., 2000; Elsisy et al., 2019). Such a use has become popular since Erdós and Rényi introduced the random network model (Erdös and Rényi, 1959). It generates an edge between each pair of nodes with a fixed probability p.
The resulting networks are highly random as expected. Yet, despite interesting mathematical properties of this model, later research discovered that random networks rarely arise in nature or engineering practice. The more advanced models proposed later include the scale-free network model (Barabási and Albert, 1999) and its variants that represent the structures of many social and naturally arising networks. Another one is the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) (Holland et al., 1983) which extends the random network model by grouping nodes into blocks. The probability of an edge between a pair of nodes is now determined by the probability of connection between the blocks to which the nodes belong.
This model produces community structure resembling those arising in real networks but limits the differences between degrees of individual nodes located in the same block. This weakness is addressed by SBM variants, such as the degree planted SBM (Karrer and Newman, 2011) or the degree-corrected planted partition model (Newman, 2016). The Lancichinetti-Fortunato-Radicchi (LFR) benchmark (Lancichinetti et al., 2008) generates synthetic networks with the desired heterogeneity of the node degrees and community size distribution. The 2 generated networks are customized using such parameters as power law exponents for the node degrees, the community size, and the density of edges within the same community to mimic real networks. These networks are often used to test community detection methods. A model presented in (Xiao et al., 2020) generates synthetic networks by rewiring edges in real-life networks. The more edges are rewired, the blurrier the communities become, allowing only the increasingly more stable communities to prevail. Another generative model creates a hierarchical multi-layer networks that are often used to represent the hierarchical management structures (Ravasz and Barabási, 2003).
In general, we are interested in computer based social networks that have been supported by the growing number of computer platforms and companies.
The activities in such networks generate massive amounts of data, to which, however, access is increasingly limited due to privacy concerns. We are particularly interested in covert (a.k.a. hidden) networks, such as terrorist and criminal networks. The common trait of such networks is that they try to hide their membership, structure, and illegal activities. The membership in such networks is often secretive. Their essential interactions are covert, so their non-essential interactions seem overly visible, making essential ones difficult to observe. Law enforcement in most of the countries is limited in the means of collected data by privacy laws protecting citizens from unjustified surveillance.
As a result, the data about covert networks is often incomplete and partially incorrect. This creates a challenge in interpreting or discerning the structure and activities of such networks. An additional challenge arises from the inaccessibility to researchers of data about networks under investigations. Only for a fraction of networks whose members were prosecuted in the court, such data becomes publicly available.
A network generator introduced here addresses these challenges. It is designed to create a set of synthetic networks, each structurally similar to a real network, but with anonymous nodes that are interconnected or clustered slightly differently than nodes in the original network. The direct use of such anonymized networks is to train research and analytical tools for finding struc 3 ture and dynamics of covert networks. However, the synthetic networks provide alternative interpretations of the data about the original network. The distribution of probabilities for these alternative interpretations enables users to quantify statistically expected outcomes of operations on the covert networks.
Another use of the alternative interpretations is to decide if the data collected for the given covert network is sufficient for getting a reliable interpretation of this network’s structure and dynamics. A high frequency of alternative interpretations of the original network structure make them likely candidates for ground truth structure. To decide which interpretation is most likely the true structure of the original network may require collecting additional data.
The synthetic networks created by our generator can also be useful for analyzing the social networks with partial information about their structures and bio-medical networks in which massive collection of experimental data about network dynamics makes the data partially incomplete and incorrect.
2. A model of organizations represented by covert networks Discovery and monitoring of covert networks often rely on getting access to information flows among nodes suspected to be involved in network activities.
This flow may involve wiretapped telephone interactions, message exchanges, recorded conversations, or copies of written documents. We refer to an organization represented by such a network as covert and to the nodes as members.
Using community detection, we discover what we call groups of members who interact among themselves more often than with other members. We prefer this term over communities, which usually denotes the nodes having casual relationships, or clusters, which refer to subsets of nodes with similar values for selected attributes. In small organizations, groups could be independent of the organizational structure of the network, but more often they have a hierarchical structure for management nodes. The number of hierarchy levels depends on the organization size. Our model represents each group by parameters such as the average density of edges inside the group, from this group to other groups, 4 and the placements of group members in the organization hierarchy. The model uses parameters to individualize group leader connections to members of its group and, separately, to other nodes. Given an original network, the generator individualizes it by randomly rewiring edges of its groups and its management hierarchy (Ravasz and Barabási, 2003). As a result, our model combines two network models: SBM for groups and hierarchical network for management structure.
Most of the previously proposed synthetic network generators rely only on one network generative model. For example, in (Shang et al., 2020) the authors propose a network generator that creates synthetic multi-layered networks. A network generator presented in (Guo and Kraines, 2009) implements small-world social networks with the desired high clustering coefficient. Another network generator described in (Benyahia et al., 2016) creates dynamic networks with the prescribed community structure.
3. Data To present our generator in action, we use the Caviar and Ciel datasets (Morselli, 2009). The former defines a drug smuggling network, using data collected from 1994 to 1996 by an investigation of the West End Gang in Montreal, Canada. This gang was active in trafficking hashish and cocaine. During the investigation, police repeatedly confiscated shipments of drugs, but made no arrests until the investigation ended. The collected data mainly consists of the lists of phone calls made among gang members. Every two months, investigators were creating a snapshot of the network, in which each edge represents the calls made between two nodes during the corresponding two months and the edge weight is equal to the number of these calls. In total 11 snapshots were collected. The snapshots allow us to observe the network reactions to the shipment confiscations, and to the changes in positions of members in the network occurring between snapshots.
In the case of the Caviar network, we know which nodes had some man 5 agement roles from the publicly released court proceedings. For example, these proceedings identified node N 1 (see Fig. 2) as the leader of the hashish group, and node N 12 as the leader of the cocaine group. Fig. 1 shows more nodes in management roles in the Caviar groups. Still, the community detection algorithm alone did not assign many low degree nodes to any group (Bahulkar et al., 2018). We also present the results obtained with the Ciel dataset (Morselli, Figure 1: Illustration of our model integration of the stochastic block model (SBM) with the hierarchical multi-layer network model in the Caviar network. Nodes marked with the same color belong to the same group. Nodes placed at the same hierarchy levels play the same roles in the management of this network.
2009), which defines an illicit drug transportation network that was engaged in trafficking in hashish from Jamaica in Montreal. The collection of data lasted from May 1996 to June 1997. The data defines a network with weighted edges representing the volumes of nodes’ interactions obtained from the records of telephone calls and conversation surveillance. Only key managers of the network groups are identified. Nodes N 1, N 2, and N 10 all took part in leading the network. There was no listing of the ground truth groups. For both networks, we use the Louvain community detection algorithm (Blondel et al., 2008) to find 6 groups and the relative betweenness centrality to find nodes involved in managerial roles. Since criminal networks often have sparse connectivity because of attempts to hide network activities, we execute a version of Louvain algorithm for graphs with undirected edges. For this execution, we temporally transform directed edges of the generated networks into undirected ones, summing their weights for pairs of nodes which have two opposing edges connecting them.
Covert networks may prioritize either efficiency or security, but not both. The Caviar Ciel Network Node identifier N 1 N 3 N 12 N 76 N 1 N 2 N 10 RBC score 0.430 0.180 0.303 0.078 0.591 0.641 0.015 Rank of the score 1 3 2 4 2 1 7 Table 1: The relative betweenness centrality of the management nodes of the Caviar and Ciel networks reveals their different priorities in managing criminal organization. In the Caviar network managers are strongly connected to the nodes in their groups, which improves efficiency of management. In contrast, In Ciel network management nodes connect direct only to subordinates. This may benefit security of node N 10.
betweenness centrality of a node measures a fraction of the shortest paths of information flow between all pairs of nodes passing through this node (Unnithan et al., 2014). A normalized version of this metric, called relative betweenness centrality, limits its range to [0,1]. We use it for ease of comparison of the results. We conclude that the structures of the Caviar and Ciel networks are fundamentally different. The Caviar network prioritized efficiency. This is indicated by the highest relative betweenness centrality scores of the management nodes, which are N 1, boss, and N 3, N 12, N 76, managers, among all nodes in the Caviar network (cf. Table 1). The implied easy access to these nodes from others supports high efficiency of information flow in the network, but low security for the leader nodes. In contrast, in the Ciel network, the boss limits the connections to direct subordinates. Consequently, node N 10 has a very low relative betweenness centrality (RBC) when compared to the manager nodes, 7 N 1 and N 2, (see Table 1) even though some management role was plausible for him (Morselli, 2009).
We chose the Caviar and Ciel datasets for our study because they are well studied and analyzed using public data released during court proceedings (Bahulkar et al., 2018; Berlusconi, 2013; Skillicorn et al., 2013). We show that synthetic networks generated by our generator for both networks are similar to the original ones. This is important because only pieces of the ground truth are available for covert networks under investigation.
4. Implementation of the Random Anonymized Network Generator 4.1. Overview The Random Anonymized Network Generator (RANG) organizes its network generation process into the following three steps. The owners of the original network data execute the first step. They need to replace node identity and its personal data by a single unique numerical ID of this node. They also need to assign to each node its place in the management hierarchy, a group to which this node belongs and two lists, one of the subordinates and the other of superiors. The second step is executed by RANG software. It summarizes the group structure of the network as the list of probabilities of an edge between any pair of nodes. These probabilities depend on groups to which the nodes belong and the roles these nodes play in the network. The obtained data are shared with the outside users or used internally by the owners. The third step generates a set of synthetic random networks using the edge probabilities defined in the second step and analyzes this set for a group structure stability and nodes’ management roles consistency.
4.2. Generating groups in covert networks Social networks often have directed weighted edges to represent intensity of interactions measured in frequency of calls, messages, or meetings. Within SBM, we use one of the two models to assign weights to edges.
8 The first process for assigning edges is called the Weighted Random Graph (WRG) generator (Garlaschelli, 2009). Let W denote the sum of weight of all edges and E the maximum number of edges we can generate between subsets of nodes. In WRG, the edges’ weights are generated by running Bernoulli trials with probability p = W . This run stops at the first failed trial. The number W+E of successful trials before this failure defines the weight of the generated edge.
This process gives rise to the geometric distribution of edge weights.
We introduce here an alternative approach, named Bernoulli Weighted Random Network (BWRN) model. It has two parameters. One is a vector of the weights w’s for edges in the original graph, and the other is the probability p B that controls the variance of the generated weight distribution. The process of generating edges starts with the heaviest edges and progresses down to edges with the smallest weight. Given the currently processed weight w, an associated weight is computed as w = (cid:98)w/p (cid:99). For each edge with w weight in the origi B B nal graph, we select a weight in the range [0,(cid:100)w/p (cid:101)] as follows. First, we select B randomly a pair of not yet connected nodes and run w Bernoulli trials with B probability p . If p w < w, we do one more Bernoulli trial with probability B B B p = w−p w . The weight from such a run is equal to the number of successes a B B in those trials. The edge is not created when this run returns weight 0.
This design yields a distribution of weights with probability of choosing weight k, where 0 ≤ k ≤ (cid:100)w/p (cid:101) is defined as: B   (w B )! pk (1 − p )w B −k if k ≤ w (w −k)!k! B B B p (k,p ) = B (1) w B  w − p w for k = w + 1 if p w < w B B B B B As a result, the average sum of weights of all edges created by this process is the same as in the original network. Indeed, the expected weight from Equation 1 is p w + w − p w = w.
B B B B The parameter p defines probability that the edge of weight w will not be B generated, which is (1 − p )w B if w = p w and (1 − p )w B(1 − w + p w) B B B B B otherwise, so it quickly decreases with increase of w and p . With p > 0.9 B B even edges with weight 1 have low chance of below 1% to be lost. An interesting 9 trade-off arises for slightly lower values of p . For example with p = 0.875, B B which we used for computational experiments here, about 10% of such edges will not appear in the generated network but a similar fraction of edges will increase their weight to 2, strengthening cohesiveness of some communities.
The variance of the distribution of the weights generated for an edge with weight w in the original data is w(1 − p ) + p (p − p ) ≈ w(1 − p ) (Feller, B a B a B 1968), so it grows with increase in w but decays with increase of p 1. Thus, B selecting large p will make generated synthetic networks more similar to the B original one, while decreasing it would have opposite effects. Hence, different kinds of analyses could be conducted with different choices of p .
B By taking into account weights of edges, our model allows users to define different edge densities in the group for edges at the same level of hierarchy (e.g., among peers) than for edges across the hierarchy (e.g., between the group leader and a subordinate). This enables users to account for typically higher information flow intensities between managers and subordinates than among peers.
4.3. Detecting groups in the generated networks To test the accuracy of our synthetic network generator, we ran the Louvain community detection algorithm Blondel et al. (2008) on all the generated networks and compared the generated groups to the groups in the original network. Yet, there are many high quality community detection algorithms, such as Speak Easy Gaiteri et al. (2015), which we triesd and it yielded similar results, CPM Traag et al. (2011), modularity maximization Chen et al. (2014), fast Clauset et al. (2004), or adaptive modularity Lu et al. (2018) that can be used for this purpose on social and covert networks, so users of RANG can use any of them for this purpose.
We observe that in the Caviar and Ciel networks, these two groups often 1 Indeed (cid:80)w B k 2 p (1−p )+k 2 ∗p p +(2 k +1)p p = w(1−p )+w 2 +p (p −p ).
k=0 k a k a k a B a B a Hence Var(p ,w) = w(1−p )+p (p −p ) B B a B a 10