Under review.
Transformers as Unrolled Inference in Probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps: An Interpretation and Potential Improvements Aditya Ravuri aditya.ravuri@cl.cam.ac.uk University of Cambridge Neil D. Lawrence University of Cambridge Abstract We propose a probabilistic interpretation of transformers as unrolled inference steps assuming a probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps model from the Prob DR framework. Our derivation shows that at initialisation, transformers perform “linear” dimensionality reduction. We also show that within the transformer block, a graph Laplacian term arises from our arguments, rather than an attention matrix (which we interpret as an adjacency matrix). We demonstrate that simply subtracting the identity from the attention matrix (and thereby taking a graph diffusion step) improves validation performance on a language model and a simple vision transformer.
1 Introduction Transformers, introduced in Vaswani et al. (2017), have been an incredibly successful architecture found for deep learning, leading to vastly scaled models used for language, as part of Large Language Models (LLM s), such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), vision transformers (Vi Ts) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), foundation models for speech (e.g. wav 2 vec) (Baevski et al., 2020) and many other application areas.
The mathematical basis for their success is an active area of interest. Inspired by the idea that transformers perform dimensionality reduction, we roughly follow the approach of Yu et al. (2023), providing an alternate interpretation, arguing that each block of a transformer, at initialisation, performs gradient descent on a variational lower bound of the probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps model of Ravuri et al. (2023). As part of a visual experiment, we show that MNIST flattened images cluster tightly by class when input to a transformer.
We also show that a modification, simply subtracting an identity matrix from the attention matrix (in other words, performing graph diffusion, or Laplacian smoothing in the attention step), follows from our interpretation, and we show that this architectural change can be more performant on a language model and vision transformer fit on the tiny Shakespeare and Open Web Text datasets (Karpathy, 2015; Gokaslan et al., 2019), and the downsampled Imagenet datasets (Russakovsky et al., 2015; Chrabaszcz et al., 2017) respectively. This work is a proof of concept on how the insights of Ravuri et al. (2023) can be used to improve engineering tools.
Related Work In our work, we interpret the attention matrix as an adjacency matrix of a nearest-neighbour graph, and show that unrolled optimisation in a dimensionality reduction model leads to the transformer architecture.
The interpretation of attention matrices as matrices of data-point similarity or relevance has a long history; Vaswani et al. (2017) and many works since, for instance, Weng (2018); Chefer et al. (2021), have visualised attention matrices corresponding to text inputs, image patches, etc. for the purposes of interpretability.
Recent work has interpreted the attention matrix as an adjacency and shown that graph convolutions improve the performance of the architecture (Choi et al., 2024). In our work, we show that the graph diffusion steps also increase the performance of the architecture. In the realm of graph convolutional networks, Kipf & 1 5202 lu J 82 ]GL.sc[ 1 v 04012.7052:vi Xra Under review.
Welling (2017) motivate their architecture from a spectral graph convolutional perspective, and using a slightly different derivation of their updates, we find that an update also involves a graph Laplacian term of the form θ x+θ Lx. More recently, Joshi (2025) interprets transformer attention matrices as fully connected 0 1 graph adjacencies, to relate transformers to graph attention networks of Veličković et al. (2018).
Our interpretation of the weight matrices as learning rotation and step size suggests that transformers learn to learn, or learn to optimise quickly (i.e. perform optimisation in a latent variable model with just n blocks number of steps); an overview of this field and its major ideas is presented in Chen et al. (2021).
2 Background We recap Prob DR’s variational Laplacian Eigenmaps formulation, which forms the basis of our interpretation.
Laplacian Eigenmaps is a dimensionality reduction algorithm that reduces the size of a dataset Y ∈ Rn×d to a smaller matrix of representations X ∈ Rn×d q,d << d. The probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps model is a q probabilistic interpretation of the algorithm (i.e. a model, inference within which leads to the algorithm in question). It can be written as the following, where a Wishart distribution is placed on a precision matrix, of which the graph Laplacian is an estimate, d · L(Y) ∼ W((XXT + βI)−1,d).
MAP inference for latent embeddings X ∈ Rn,d q in this model is equivalent to KL minimisation over a random variable Γ, where the model and variational constraints are written as, logp(Γ) = log W(Γ|(XXT + βI)−1,d), logq(Γ) = log W(Γ|L(Y),d), where L(Y) ∈ Sn is a graph Laplacian 1 matrix encoding a k-nearest neighbour graph, calculated using the + data Y ∈ Rn,d, with d >> d typically. The model graphs are shown in the footnote 2. It was shown in q Ravuri et al. (2023) that the maximum of ELBO, which simplifies as −KL(q(Γ)∥p(Γ)), is attained when the latent embeddings are estimated as follows, (cid:16) (cid:17)1/2 X ˆ = U Λ−1 − βI R, d q d q d q where U are the d eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian corresponding to the smallest non-zero eigenvalues d q q encoded within the diagonal matrix Λ, and where R ∈ O(n) is an arbitrary rotation matrix. Further, note that, with an additional constraint, namely X⊤X = I, the optimal estimate becomes 3, ˆ X = U R.
d q In the later case, assuming that E (X ˆ ) = 0, note that V(X ˆ ) = P X ˆ2 /n = 1/n w.p. 1.
p(Xˆ|Y) ij ij k kj The variational interpretation of Sim Siam, a Semi-Supervised Learning method We make a short digression to show how the model graph of Prob DR is not atypical in the representation learning field. Let Ya,Yb,... be augmentations/views/modalities of a data point. Sim Siam, introduced in i i Chen & He (2020), is a semi-supervised learning method that constructs representations of the data by minimising the negative inner product, X L = − f(h(Y m a))⊤f(Y m b), i i i m ,m a b P 1 We denote the adjacency matrix as A, hence L = D−A, with D = A .
ii ik k 2 The model graph can be drawn as: X Γ and the variational graph as: Y Γ .
3 This is a consequence of the trace minimisation theorem, as the objective is simply tr(LXXT). Any arbitrary rotation still remains a solution as the objective and the constraint are invariant to rotations.
2 Under review.
where the element in red is under stop-grad, and with f(Ym),f(h(Ym)) ∈ Sd q −1. Nakamura et al. (2023) i i show that this loss function has a variational interpretation, where, Y X p(X |Y ) ∝ v MF(X |f(h(Ym)),κ), q(X |Y ) ∝ δ(X |f(Ym)) i i i i i i i i m m X ⇒ KL(q||p) = c − E (logp(X |Y )) = − f(h(Y m a))⊤f(Y m b) = L .
q(X i |Y i ) i i i i i m ,m a b Due to the stop-grad applied to the elements of the loss that form the variational constraint, we note that the model graphs are very similar to Prob DR, in that the variational constraint is treated as an observed random variable. We see the variational constraint as approximating a reasonable embedding of the data at every iteration of the optimisation process. As an example, if f were initialised as a random projection of the data, it is known that certain properties of the data are retained in the resulting embedding (due to the Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma). If an optimisation step corresponding to the model preserves/improves these properties (and does not make f degenerate or collapse), we can rely on the variational constraint to always provide an approximate but valid “view” of the data for the model to approach. We apply a similar principle in section 3.
Transformers as unrolled optimisation We now summarise the idea of Yu et al. (2023) on how transformers correspond to unrolled optimisation.
Assume a random variable X ∈ Rn×d q, where d is the number of latent dimensions and n is the number q of i.i.d. data points (of image patches, text tokens, high-dimensional signals, etc.) to which rows of the representations X correspond. Assuming a latent variable model on X and a corresponding probabilistic objective L (a negative log density −logp(X) or an upper bound on it), gradient descent with m steps of the objective can be unrolled as a sequence of random variables, T T T X −→ X −→ ... −→ X .
1 2 s Yu et al. (2023) showed that the gradient descent operation T is very similar to the operations that occur in an (encoder) transformer block, assuming a Gaussian mixture model with a sparse prior on the latent representations X. We note that due to the representations being latent, the model considered in Yu et al.
(2023) can also be thought of as a mixture of principal component analysers, therefore suggesting that transformers perform linear (non-kernelised) dimensionality reduction.
3 Transformers as Prob DR Inference In this work, we present an alternative interpretation to that of Yu et al. (2023), that shows that transformers perform gradient descent on a variational objective derived using a variational form of the probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps model of Ravuri et al. (2023). We rewrite the random variable corresponding to latents as Z, and treat X as a parameter that encodes latent positions. We modify the model by adding a prior on the latents, (cid:0) (cid:1) logp(Γ,Z) = log W Γ|(ZZ⊤ + βI)−1 ,d) + log U∗(Z).
U∗ is a matrix von-Mises-Fisher distribution (a uniform over matrices, with rows that lie on a d -dimensional q Pd hypersphere), with an additional constraint that for every row x, q x = 0 (the rows have zero mean, and i i hence the coordinates lie on a hyperplane). Projected optimisation with this prior will lead to Layer Norm steps during optimisation.
We force the random variable Z to take values X a.s., and we modify the calculation of the graph Laplacian used in the variational constraint, so that it’s a function of the latents Z and not the data Y, ˜ q(Γ,Z) = W(Γ|L(Z),d) ∗ δ(Z|X).
The graph Laplacian is computed as L ˜ = I−A ˜ (Z) = I−σ(κZZT−M) where σ is the softmax function, applied ˜ row-wise (so that the row sums of the input matrix all equal one). A, we argue, is a soft (differentiable) proxy 3 Under review.
to the true nearest neighbour adjacency matrix, particularly when the latent embeddings X are initialised with PCA or random projections, as XX⊤ is a minimal-error estimate of the empirical covariance of the data, and the covariance between similar points is expected to be similar in value. This leads to the row-wise softmax being similar for similar points, encoding a similarity structure. M is a mask matrix (for example, if we were to disallow self-adjacency, M can be set to ιI, with ι → ∞), and κ is a hyperparameter that can ˜ be tuned such that the proxy adjacency A is “close to” a reference nearest neighbour matrix.
In a similar fashion to Prob DR, and the variational interpretation to Sim Siam, we treat the variational constraint as an observed random variable, and hence do not account for gradient updates to terms leading from the variational constraint. Hence, the KL-div. with stop-grad applied to the variational constraint is, KL (cid:0) q(Γ,Z)∥p(Γ,Z) (cid:1) ∝ tr (cid:0) L ˜ (XX⊤ + βI) (cid:1) −logdet(XX⊤ + βI)+c, | {z } | {z } L data L reg P where ∀i : X ∈ Sd q −1 and X = 0. Yu et al. (2023) show that a transformer block’s sequence of i j ij updates follows gradient descent of an objective in steps; given an objective L(X) = L (X) + L (X), data reg they interpret a transformer block calculations as an alternating optimisation process involving the updates, d L d L X′ ←− X − η ∗ data , X ←− X′ − η ∗ reg .
d X d X′ In this work, we analyse the transformer at initialisation (e.g. with all weights set to diagonal matrices) and consider transformers with single heads, which simplifies the analysis for exposition. We believe that this can be extended trivially by considering a product-of-experts type distribution as part of the variational constraint. Furthermore, for this work, we ignore the Re LU activation that forms a part of the fully connected segment of the transformer; however, this can be re-added simply by adding a sparsity prior, derived in Yu et al. (2023), as our regularisation term is identical to theirs (the sparsity terms notwithstanding).
We now show how an (encoder) transformer block’s operations arise as optimisation steps of our objective.
˜ ˜ First, note that, d L/d X = 2 LX = 2(A−I), and a gradient descent update for optimisation of L follows, data X ←− X + 2η(σ(κXX⊤ − βI − M) − I)X.
The element highlighted in red shows the only difference to a standard attention operation (as the attention matrix is the only term that appears in the ordinary architecture). Next, we must take a projection step to P ensure that ∀i : X ∈ Sd q −1 and X = 0, and hence, i j ij X ←− Layer Norm(X).
We now optimise w.r.t. L . Note that this is exactly the same form of regularisation (apart from the reg sparse prior that gives rise to the Re LU, which is ignored for the sake of exposition, but can trivially be introduced) as the term that appears in Yu et al. (2023). We refer the reader to that work for a careful argument for how this term approximately gives rise to a linear update, but here, we simply approximate d L /d X = 2(XXT + βI)−1 X ≈ 2/(d + β)X, and our remaining optimisation steps simply involve this reg q update and another projection, 2η X ←− X − X β + d q X ←− Layer Norm(X), which completes the transformer block operations, assuming simple initialisations. Note that a key insight is that the probabilistic interpretation differs from practice in that the former does Laplacian smoothing (graph diffusion - i.e. the subtraction of an identity matrix, or a degree matrix, from the attention matrix), whereas the later does not.
4 Under review.
An interpretation of the weight matrices We posit that an update such as X ←− X+XW can be interpret as a rotation (which, under the probabilislin tic Laplacian Eigenmaps model, the solution is invariant to) and a scaling, which, under our interpretation, corresponds to a learnt step size η = |W|1/d q; this is a restatement of the belief that transformers learn to learn, in other words, perform optimisation (assuming a dimensionality reduction or clustering model) with few steps.
4 Experiments We provide three main experiments to show validity of the ideas presented thus far. In the first, we show that a transformer initialised in a simple way performs dimensionality reduction, using flattened images from the MNIST dataset. In the second, we show that removing an identity matrix from the attention matrix as suggested by our derivations increases performance on the Shakespeare dataset and a downsampled (16-by 16) version of Imagenet. In the third, we show that training of GPT-2 converges faster with our modification, than without.
4.1 Transformers perform Dimensionality Reduction The details of our dimensionality reduction experiment are as follows. We set up a sequential neural network, with an initial projection layer with weight W ∼ MN(0,I /d,I ) that is randomly initialised with proj d d q Gaussian entries (i.e. a Gaussian random projection). Next, the network consists of a set of n = 8 blocks encoder transformer blocks. We found that increasing the number of blocks makes the latents collapse into extremely tight clusters. The Layer Norms have post-normalization weights associated with them, W = √ norm I/ n, which is because we expect the optimum to be akin to eigenvectors of a graph Laplacian, which would √ √ have variance 1/ n, as explained in the background. The transformer block weights are W = κn I,W = q k p κn/q I and W = 2η corresponding to the query, key, value weight matrices. The query and key matrices v were set up such that the attention matrix, pre-normalisation, has a diagonal equal to κ. We set κ = 30, based on the clustering empirically observed in the resulting graph Laplacian’s eigenvectors. Finally, the feed-forward block is a single layer with weight W = −2η. Note that, based on our derivation (specifically, lin the scalar coefficient to the attention matrix), η can be a maximum of 0.5 to avoid magnitudes of the updates being too large, and so we use the learning rate η = 0.4. We use the latent dimension d = 128. Passing the q flattened images through the transformer can be seen to perform clustering, as illustrated in fig. 1.
Figure 1: The first two latent dimensions corresponding to flattened MNIST images after a random initialisation (left), and after eight steps through a transformer block (right), showing that transformer blocks cluster points in the latent space.
4.2 Graph Diffusion improves performance In the second experiment, we simply replace the attention matrix A within a transformer architecture, found in nano GPT (Karpathy, 2022) with the negative graph Laplacian A − I, and run the model multiple times on the Shakespeare dataset. We also repurpose the code to build a small vision transformer, and train it 5 Under review.
naively (i.e. without random augmentations, learning rate schedules, etc.) on the downsampled Imagenet dataset, wherein all images are 16 by 16 pixels. On this dataset, a benchmark given in Chrabaszcz et al.
(2017) achieves 40% validation accuracy, whereas our naïve Vi T acheives around 26%. In both cases however, validation performance improves when we replace the attention matrix by the negative graph Laplacian.
Figure 2: Left: validation losses on the Shakespeare dataset and right: validation accuracies on a downsampled Imagenet dataset, showing that Laplacian smoothing achieves a better performance in both cases.
4.3 GPT-2 converges faster with Graph Diffusion In fig. 3, we show the difference in training losses between a run without graph diffusion, and a run with our modification. We use the same pre-training strategy laid out in Karpathy (2022), however, we train our GPT-2 model (with about 125 M parameters) on a single GH 200 GPU (instead of using torch parallelisation), and we increase batch size and learning rate by a factor of six to make use of the large memory available.
Figure 3: Visualisation of the difference in training losses with and without graph diffusion. A positive difference indicates that the graph diffusion run has achieved a higher performance at any iteration just before convergence. This shows that the graph diffusion run converges slightly faster than the run without any modifications.
5 Conclusion We have shown that transformer blocks correspond to unrolled inference assuming a probabilistic Laplacian Eigenmaps model, and that a simple architectural tweak - using a negative Laplacian A − I in place of the attention matrix A - yields consistent gains in language and vision settings. Future work will explore if nonlinear (kernelised) probabilistic models of dimensionality reduction (from Ravuri & Lawrence (2024)4) can increase performance in models with lower latent dimensionality, and relate transformers to other generalised architectures.
P 4 A simplified version of their objective can be stated as tr(LXX⊤)+ 1/(1+∥X −X ∥2), and it can be shown that an i j ij update step with this new regularisation term also involves a graph-diffusion-type update.
6 Under review.
Acknowledgments AR would like to thank the Accelerate Programme for Scientific Discovery for supporting their Ph D, and Ferenc Huszar for computational resources.
References Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav 2 vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09838.
Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Wuyang Chen, Howard Heaton, Jialin Liu, Zhangyang Wang, and Wotao Yin. Learning to optimize: A primer and a benchmark, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12828.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2011.10566.
Jeongwhan Choi, Hyowon Wi, Jayoung Kim, Yehjin Shin, Kookjin Lee, Nathaniel Trask, and Noseong Park.
Graph convolutions enrich the self-attention in transformers!, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
04234.
Patryk Chrabaszcz, Ilya Loshchilov, and Frank Hutter. A downsampled variant of imagenet as an alternative to the cifar datasets, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.08819.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16 x 16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
Aaron Gokaslan, Vanya Cohen, Ellie Pavlick, and Stefanie Tellex. Openwebtext corpus. http:// Skylion 007.github.io/Open Web Text Corpus, 2019.
Chaitanya K. Joshi. Transformers are graph neural networks, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
22084.
Andrej Karpathy. char-rnn. https://github.com/karpathy/char-rnn, 2015.
Andrej Karpathy. Nano GPT. https://github.com/karpathy/nano GPT, 2022.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks, 2017.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907.
Hiroki Nakamura, Masashi Okada, and Tadahiro Taniguchi. Representation uncertainty in self-supervised learning as variational inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 16484–16493, 2023.
Aditya Ravuri and Neil D. Lawrence. Towards one model for classical dimensionality reduction: A probabilistic perspective on umap and t-sne, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17412.
Aditya Ravuri, Francisco Vargas, Vidhi Lalchand, and Neil D Lawrence. Dimensionality reduction as probabilistic inference. In Fifth Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.07658.pdf.
7 Under review.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, Dec 2015. ISSN 1573-1405. doi: 10.1007/s 11263-015-0816-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s 11263-015-0816-y.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2017/file/3 f 5 ee 243547 dee 91 fbd 053 c 1 c 4 a 845 aa-Paper.pdf.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio.
Graph attention networks, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903.
Lilian Weng. Attention? attention! lilianweng.github.io, 2018. URL https://lilianweng.github.io/ posts/2018-06-24-attention/.
Yaodong Yu, Sam Buchanan, Druv Pai, Tianzhe Chu, Ziyang Wu, Shengbang Tong, Benjamin D. Haeffele, and Yi Ma. White-box transformers via sparse rate reduction, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2306.01129.
8