9102 ya M 31 ]OR.sc[ 1 v 73650.5091:vi Xra Randomized Adversarial Imitation Learning for Autonomous Driving 1 1 Myung Jae Shin , Joongheon Kim 1 Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea mjshin.cau@gmail.com, joongheon@gmail.com Abstract With the evolution of various advanced driver assistance system (ADAS) platforms, the design of autonomous driving system is becoming more complex and safety-critical. The autonomous driving system simultaneously activates multiple ADAS functions; and thus it is essential to coordinate various ADAS functions. This paper proposes a randomized adversarial imitation learning (RAIL)methodthatimitatesthecoordinationofautonomous vehicle equipped with advanced sensors. Figure 1: Simplified learning hierarchy to control vehicle systems.
The RAIL policies are trained through derivativefree optimization for the decision maker that co- the low-level controllers needs to select appropriate ADAS ordinates the proper ADAS functions, e.g., smart functions when the vehicle acts in dynamic on-road environcruise control and lane keeping system. Especially, ments [Korssen et al., 2018]. The objective of the supervisor the proposed method is also able to deal with the is to be a decision maker of the overall system during driv LIDAR dataandmakesdecisionsincomplexmulti- ing operation. The problem is that the driving policies of the lane highways and multi-agent environments. supervisor should satisfy the robustness regardless of various traffic environments. Prior research results on autonomous driving consist of diverse approaches with rule-based driv 1 Introduction ing policies. However, these policies have been difficult With the increasingly growing interests in autonomous driv- to cope with time-varying environments (i.e., huge observaing, the various forms of advanced driver assistance sys- tion spaces and action spaces) [Ahmed, 1999]. Recently, the tem (ADAS) functions such as smart cruise control (SCC), emergence of deep reinforcement learning (DRL), which utilane keeping system (LKS) and collision-avoidance systems lizes powerful function approximations such as neural net- (CAS) have been developed with high potentials in the en- works, allows the supervisorto obtainrobust drivingpolicies; hanced convenience of drivers for limited on-driving situ- it has made revolutionary progresses in the autonomous drivations. Especially, in multi-lane highway environments, it ing [Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Hoel et al., 2018; is essential to form efficient long term assistance strategies Mukadam et al., 2017]. However, there are challenges with while maintaining safety because the malfunctions in safety DRL when the driving policies try to learn the policies that cause on-road accidents and road congestion. The various maximizetheexpectedrewardsduringoperation. Thecriteria ADAS functions presented in modern autonomous driving for what should be the reward function of autonomous drivhave highinterdependence;thus it has to be regardedas a sin- ing is still in progress in many studies. Furthermore, since gle integrated system. Therefore the strategies that properly there are undesirable policies to maximize the expected recoordinate the ADAS functions are required. wards at the expense of violating the implicit rules of the en A conventional system hierarchy of autonomous vehicle vironments, it is difficult to learn the robust and safe poliis as illustrated in Fig. 1. The low-level ADAS controllers cies through DRL in autonomous driving [Pan et al., 2018].
are directly connectedto the LIDAR sensors accessible in au- These problems motivate the researchers to adopt imitation tonomous vehicle. The controllers determine the information learning (IL) to optimize the driving policy instead. The neededtocontroltheautonomousvehicleandtransmitthede- IL trains the driving policies based on the desired behavtermined operations to mechanical components. As a single ior demonstrations rather than the configuration of the speintegrated system, it is expected that multiple ADAS func- cific reward functions as well as the IL can leverage domain tions simultaneously cooperate to manage the systems oper- knowledge. Based on theadvantagesof IL,it has beenproved ation of the vehicle. Therefore, a supervisor that coordinates that the IL performs remarkably in the areas of robotics, navigation, autonomous vehicle, and etc [Pomerleau, 1991; on expert demonstrations in highway autonomous vehicle Pomerleau, 1989; Pan et al., 2018]. However, the main chal- control environments. Sec. 7 concludes this paper.
lenge faced by many researchers is the techniques that combine DRL and IL algorithms require too much data to 2 Related Work achieve reasonable performance, and the corresponding fa Imitation learning (IL). The IL methods are divided into mous example is generative adversarial imitation learning two categories, i.e., behavioral cloning (BC) and inverse re- (GAIL) [Schulman et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2017]. To inforcementlearning (IRL). The BC is consideredas the simaddressthisissue, thealgorithmmodelsbecomecomplicated; plest IL method. To restore expert policy, it works by coland thus the models lead to reproducibility crisis. Furtherlecting training data from the expert drivers behaviors, and more, the models are sensitive to the implementation structhen uses it to directly learn the corresponding policy. If the ture of the same algorithms and rewards from environments.
policy deviates from trajectories that is trained in the training For example, in GAIL, the discriminator of Generative Adprocedure, the agent tends to be fragile. This is because beversarial Networks (GAN) takes a role of the reward funchavior cloning tries to reduce the 1-step deviation error of tion. With the combination of discrimination and the comtraining data, not to reduce the error of entire trajectories.
plex DRL algorithms, e.g., TRPO and PPO, the GAIL trains Prerequisites for reasonable policy restoration is a sufficient the policies. As a result, the reconstruction results do not number of expert driving demonstrations. On the other hand, have always reasonable performance, and can stuck in sub IRL has an intermediate procedures to estimate and recover optimal even with marginal differences. These problems the hidden reward function which explains the expert demonmake the difficulties in training robust autonomous driving stration [Ziebart et al., 2008; Finn et al., 2016 b]. Since IRL policies; the trained policies have not yet been successfully has to optimize the policy as well as the reward function, deployed to autonomous vehicles [Henderson et al., 2017 b; IRL generally implies significant computational costs. In Islam et al., 2017]. Recently, augmented random search [Finn et al., 2016 a] an d [Ho and Ermon, 2016], the theoreti- (ARS) that consists of the natural gradient policy algorithm cal and practical considerations of connections between IRL is proposed [Rajeswaran et al., 2017]. Because the ARS is and adversarial network is studied. GAIL framework learns a derivative-free simple linear policy optimization method, a policy that can imitate expert demonstration using the disit is relatively easy to reconfigure the robust trained policy criminator network, which bypasses the reward function opthat shows reasonable performance. In this work, we present timization.
an IL-based method that combines the concepts of ARS and Simplest model-free RL. The simplest model-free RL GAIL. For more details, random search based randomized method that can solve standard benchmarks of RL has been adversarial imitation learning (RAIL) algorithm is proposed studied under the two different directions: linear policies in this paper; and the RAIL algorithm trains policies using via natural policy gradients [Rajeswaran et al., 2017] and randomly generated matrices where the random matrices are a derivative-free policy optimization [Salimans et al., 2017].
used to search update directions that lead to optimal policies.
[Rajeswaran et al., 2017] shows that complicated structures This approach is advantageousin terms of computation(such of policies are not needed to solve continuous control as back-propagation)overhead reduction whereas DRL algoproblems. The authors train linear policies via natural rithms that use gradients to optimize weights. Furthermore, policy gradients. The trained policies obtain competiby leveraging expert demonstrations, our system can learn tive performance on the complex continuous environments.
the drivingpolicies of supervisorthat achievessimilar perfor In[Salimans et al., 2017], the authors showed that evolution mance compared to the expert in terms of average speeds and strategies (ES) offers less data efficiency than traditional lane changes. Through the data-intensive performance eval RL, but offers many advantages. Especially, a derivativeuation, it is demonstrated that the proposed RAIL algorithm free optimization allows ES to be more efficiently in discan train the autonomous driving decision maker as desired.
tributed learning. Furthermore, the trained policies tend to Contributions. Our proposed RAIL method shows that the be more diverse compared to policies trained by traditional random search in the space of policy parameters can be RL methods. In [Mania et al., 2018], the connection beadapted to IL for autonomous driving policies. For more detween [Salimans et al., 2017] and [Rajeswaran et al., 2017] tails, our contributions are as follows: (i) self-driving mechais studied to obtain the simplest model-free RL method yet, a nism is proposedinspiredby IL.Ourmethodcansuccessfully derivative-free optimization for training linear policies. The imitate expert demonstrations; and the corresponding static proposed simple random search method showed state-of-art and linear policies can achieve similar speeds with many lane sample efficiency compared to competing methods in Muchanges and overtakes. (ii) previous IL methods are based Jo Co locomotion benchmarks.
on conventional RL methods which show complicate configurations to control autonomous driving. However, RAIL has 3 Background simplicity based on derivative-free random search. (iii) this 3.1 Markov Decision Process (MDP) method has not been previously applied to learn the robust driving policies in autonomous driving. MDP is formalized by (S,A,p(s),p(s ′ |s,a),r(s,a,s ′ ),γ) ′ ′ Organization. Sec. 2 and Sec. 3 describe the previous work where S, A, p(s), p(s |s,a), r(s,a,s ), and γ stand for set and background knowledge. Sec. 4 defines our problem, i.e., of states, set of actions, initial state distribution, environmentraining policies for autonomous driving. Sec. 5 designs the tal dynamic represented as conditional state distribution, re RAIL algorithm. Sec. 6 shows the experiment results based ward functions, and discount factor, respectively. The environment interactions between a subject and its environment 4 Problem Definition is unboundedin the continuing tasks; and thus the returns are defined as R = ∞ γi−tr(s ,a ,s ). The objective of Motivation. By coordinating the ADAS functions in the t Pi=t i i i+1 limited situations such as highways, the autonomous driving MDP is to find a policy that maximizes the expected returns.
can be realized. To coordinate the ADAS functions for au 3.2 Generative Adversarial IL (GAIL) tonomous driving, the supervisor determines the appropriate ADAS functions based on the nearby situations. However, GAIL is used for reward function in this paper. Based on the complete states of the environment are not known to the GAN, the GAIL trains a binary classifier, D(s,a), referred to autonomous vehicle supervisor. The supervisor receives an as the discriminator, to distinguish between transitions samobservationthat is conditionedon the current state of the syspled froman expertdemonstrationand those generatedby the tem. The host vehicle interacts with the environment includtrained policies. With GAIL, an agent is able to learn a poling surrounding vehicles and lanes; and thus it uses partially icy that imitates expert demonstrations using the adversarial observable local information. Therefore, we need to model network. The objective of GAIL is defined as follows: the observation of agent as an (O,A,T,R,γ) tuple repre E argminargmax{ [log D (s,a)]+ senting a partially observable Markov decision process with π φ θ θ φ continuous observations and actions for autonomous driving.
E [log(1 − D (s,a))] − λH(π )}. (1) Similar to MDP in Section 3, there are the set of partial obπ φ θ E servation states denoted by O, instead of S. In this paper, where π ,π are the policy which is parameterized by θ θ E LIDAR data is regarded as the observation by vehicles.
, E and an expert policy. In (1), H(π ) [−logπ(a|s)] θ π In this paper,a finite state space O ∈ Rn and a finite action is entropy regularization. D (s,a) → [0,1] is the disφ space A ∈ Rp are considered. The goal of IL for autonomous criminator parameterized by φ [Ho and Ermon, 2016]. In driving is to learn a policy π ∈ Π : O × A → Rp which GAIL, the policy is instead provided a reward for confus- θ imitates expert demonstration from GAN D (s,a) → [0,1] ing the discriminator, which is then maximized via some φ where θ ∈ Rn are the policy parameters and φ ∈ Rn+p are on-policy RL optimization schemes. The D takes the φ the discriminator parameters [Ho and Ermon, 2016].
role of a reward function; and thus it gives learning signal to the policy [Ho and Ermon, 2016; Guo et al., 2018; The state space. For sensor model, we use a vector obser Henderson et al., 2017 a]. vation that consists of LIDAR sensor data. In particular, N beams are spread evenly over the field of view [ω ,ω ].
min max 3.3 Augmented Random Search (ARS) The LIDAR sensor detects around the vehicle. Each sensor data has a maximum range of r . The sensor returns the ARS is a model-free RL algorithm. Based on random max distance between the first obstacle it encounters and the host search in the parameter spaces of policies, ARS uses the vehicle, or r if no obstacle is detected. Then, the obsermethodof finite differencesto adjust its weights and learn the max way how the policy performs its given tasks [Matyas, 1965; vation is described as O = (o 1 ,...,o N ). Furthermore, based Mania et al., 2018]. Through the random search in the pa- on the distance information, the relative speed of the obstacle and the host vehicle can be calculated. Here, the relative rameter spaces, the algorithm can conduct a derivative-free optimization with noises [Matyas, 1965; Mania et al., 2018]. speed observation is described as V r = (v 1 ,...,v N ).
To update the weights effectively, ARS selects update direc- The action space. The policy is considered as a high-level tions uniformly and updates the policies along with the se- decision maker which determines optimal actions based on lected direction. For updating the parameterized policy π , observation on the highway. We assume that the autonomous θ the update direction is as r(π θ−νδ )−r(π θ+νδ ) where δ is a zero vehicle utilizes the ADAS functions; and thus the deterν mined actions of driving policy activate each ADAS funcmean Gaussian vector, ν is a positive real number which tion. The driving policy is defined in a discrete action space.
represents the standard deviation of exploration noise, and The high level decisions can be break down into the folr(π ± νδ) means the rewards from environments when the θ lowing 5 actions as follows: (1) maintain current status, parameterofpoliciesisπ ±νδ. Letθ betheweightofpolicy θ t (2) accelerate speed for a constant amount vel + vel , at t-th training iteration. N denotes that the number of sam- cur acc (3) decelerate speed for a constant amount vel − vel , pleddirectionsper iteration. Theupdatestep is configuredas: cur dec (4) make a left lane change, (5) make a right lane change.
α N The actions expect that the vehicle is adjusted with auθ t+1 = θ t + N X i=1 [r(π θ+νδ i ) − r(π θ−νδ i )]δ i . (2) tonomous emergency braking (AEB) and adaptive cruise However, the problem of random search in the parame- control (ACC) [Mukadam et al., 2017; Min and Kim, 2018; ter spaces of policies is large variations in terms of the re- Hoel et al., 2018].
wards r(π ± νδ) which are observed during training pro- The reward function. In the GAIL framework, θ cedure. The variations make the updated policies to be per- the reward from adversarial network is defined turbed through the update steps [Mania et al., 2018]. To ad- r (s,a) = −log(1 − D (s,a)) or r (s,a) = π φ π θ θ dress the large variation issue, the standard deviation σ of log(D (s,a)) [Ho and Ermon, 2016]. The former type R φ the rewards which is collected at each iteration is used to ad- of the reward is used to encourage agent to train survival just thesize oftheupdatesteps in ARS. Based ontheadaptive policies through a survival bonus in the form of positive step size, ARS shows better performance compared to DRL reward based on their lifetime. The latter is often used to algorithms (i.e., PPO, TRPO, etc.) in specific environments. train policies with a per step negative reward, when a reward Figure 2: Structure of RAIL.
function consists of a negative constant for the state and update step [Guo et al., 2018]. In RAIL, the loss function of action. However, in this case, it is hard to learn the survival least square GAN (LS-GAN) is used to train a discriminapolicies [Kostrikov et al., 2019]. The prior knowledge of tor D [Mao et al., 2017], and the objective function of the φ environmental objectives is important, but the environment- discriminator is as follows: dependent reward function is undesirable when the agent 1 requires interactions with a training environment in order to argmin L (D) = E (D (s,a) − b)2 + LS π (cid:2) φ (cid:3) 2 E imitate an expert policy. Therefore, we defined the reward φ (3) 1 function as follows: log(D φ (s,a)) − log(1 − D φ (s,a)). E π (cid:2) (D φ (s,a) − a)2 (cid:3) 2 θ 5 Randomized Adversarial IL (RAIL) where a and b are the discriminator labels for the sampled trajectories from the policy π and the expert trajectories.
θ The approach in this paper, named randomized adversar In this paper, least-squares loss function is used to train the ial imitation learning (RAIL), adopts IL through adversardiscriminator. When the loss function of original GAN Eq.1 ial network paradigm (i.e., GAIL). The main concept of is used, sampledtrajectorieswhicharefar fromtheexperttra RAIL is enhance an conventional algorithm called ARS and jectories but on the correct side of the decision boundary are GAIL[Ho and Ermon, 2016; Mania et al., 2018]. RAIL aims almost not penalized by sigmoid cross-entropyloss. In a conto trainthe drivingpolicyπ toimitate expertdriver’sdemonθ trast, the least-squaresloss function(3) penalizesthe sampled stration. Thissectiondescribesthedetailsof RAIL andmakes trajectorieswhicharefarfromthe experttrajectoriesoneither a connection between GAIL and a derivative-free optimizaside of decision boundary [Mao et al., 2017]. Therefore, the tion.
stability of training is improved; and it leads the discrimi In Fig. 2, the overall structure of RAIL is described. The nator to give accurate reward signals to the update step. In supervisorofhost vehicleis consideredas an agent whichhas LS-GAN, a and b have relationship b − a = 2 for (3) to be policy π . From the environment (i.e., multi-lane highway), θ Pearson X 2 divergence [Mao et al., 2017]. However, we use the host vehicle receives the observation. Then, the random a = 0 andb = 1 as thetargetdiscriminatorlabels. Theresults noise matrices of small values can be generated. The noise of the discriminator D are in the range of 0 to 1 (experimenφ matrices are added to or subtracted from the policy paramtally determined). In RAIL, the discriminator is interpreted eters θ. As a result, several different temporary policies are as a reward function for policy optimization. Forementioned produced. The agent interacts with the environmentsmultiple in Sec.4, the form of reward signal is as follows: times basedonthe generatednoisypoliciesandthe results are collected as sample trajectories. Based on the samples, the r (s,a) = log(D (s,a)) − log(1 − D (s,a)) (4) π φ φ θ main policy π is trained to control the autonomous driving θ This means that if the trajectories sampled from the polsuccessfully with fully utilizing ADAS functions which guaricy π is similar to expert trajectories, the policy π gets antee safety. In the training process, the policy π attempts to θ θ θ higher reward r (s,a). The policy π is updated to maxfool a discriminator D into believing the sample trajectories π θ θ φ imize the discounted sum of rewards given by the discrimiof the agent come from expert demonstrations. The D tries φ nator rather than the reward from the environment as shown to distinguish between the distribution of trajectories which in Fig. 2. The objective of RAIL can be described as are sampled by the policies π and the expert trajectories T .
θ E argmax E [r(s,a)], and then, it is as follows by (4): The trajectories consist of state-action pair (s,a). The dis- (s,a)∼π θ θ criminator takes the role of the reward module in RAIL, as E argmax [log(D (s,a)) − log(1 − D (s,a))] (5) shown in Fig. 2; and thus the policy π is trained against the (s,a)∼π φ φ θ θ θ discriminator. Therefore, the performance of the discriminator has a significant impact on convergenceand agent. where this (5) represents the connection between adversarial As shown in Fig.2, the discriminator is trained based on IL and randomized parameter space search in RAIL.
sample trajectories and expert demonstration. However, in Algorithm. As mentioned, RAIL is related to ARS which training procedure, since the policy π is updated every it- is model-free reinforcement algorithm. Thus, RAIL utilizes θ eration, the distribution of the sample trajectories changes. parameter space exploration for a derivative-free policy opti As a result, the training of the discriminator is not stabi- mization. Theparametersofπ θ aredenotedbyθ. Theπ θ conlized; and thus it gives the inaccurate reward signal to the sists of πi, πo, and activation function. The πi is the input θ θ θi policy. Consequently, the policy can be perturbated during layer of π where θi ∈ Rn×h are the parameters of the input θ Table 1: Performance (Avg. 16 Episodes, 40 Trajectories) Algorithm 1: RAIL Hyperparameters: α step size, N number of sampled Average RAIL (Stacked) RAIL (Linear) Expert directions per iteration, δi and δo Gaussian Speed [km/h] 70.38 65.00 68.83 vectors from zero mean and ν a positive # Overtake 45.04 40.03 44.48 real number standard deviation of the # Lane change 15.01 13.05 14.04 exploration noise, h hidden layer size Initialize : θi, θo from behavior cloning, Longitudinal 2719.38 2495.57 2642.11 µ 0 = 0 ∈ Rn, and P 0 = I n ∈ Rn×n Lateral -122.98 -175.6 -132.52 1 while t ≤ Episode Length do i.i.d. Random Sampling with 2 δ t = (cid:8)δ 1 ,δ 2 ,...,δ N ;δ k i ∈ Rh×n,δ k o ∈ Rp×h (cid:9) r(π t,(k),+ )−r(π t,(k),− ) (line 10-13). The state normalization is based on the information of the states encountered during 3 Collect 2 N rollouts and corresponding rewards using the the training procedure; and thus µ and are updated (line 2 N noisy policies for k ∈ {1,2,...,N}. P 4 π t,(k),+ = (θ t + νδ k )diag(P t ) −1/2(s −µ t ) 14).
5 π t,(k),− = (θ t − νδ k )diag(P t ) −1/2(s − µ t ) 6 Experiments Update discriminator parameter φ : 6 t 7 ∇ φt L LS = 2 1 E πE (cid:2)(∇ φt D φt (s,a)− b)2 (cid:3) In this section, we compare the performance between RAIL 8 +1 2 E πθ (cid:2)(∇ φ D φt (s,a)− a)2 (cid:3) and baselines. Furthermore, in order to assess the perfor 9 Update the policy parameter θ t : mance gaps between the single-layer and multi-layer policies 10 θ t+1 = θ t + N α σR P N i=1 (cid:2)r(π t,(k),+ ) − r(π t,(k),− )(cid:3)δ (k) trained by RAIL, the single-layer and two-layer (i.e., multiwhere trajectories T sampled from π layer) policies was implemented.
11 (t,(k),±) 12 r(π t,(k),± ) = Simulator. The simulated road environment is a highway E (s,a)∼π t,(k),± [log(D φ (s,a))− log(1 −D φ (s,a))] driving roadway composed of five lanes. Other vehicles are 13 Set µ t+1 , P t+1 to be the mean and covariance of the generated in the center of the random lanes within a cerstates encountered from the start of training. tain distance to the host vehicle. In addition, it is assumed 14 t = t + 1 that other vehicles do not collide with others while randomly 15 end changes the lanes. Aforementionedin Sec. 4, the observation is based on LIDAR sensor result. We assume that LIDAR sensor detects a range of 360 degrees with one ray per 15 delayer. In addition, πo is the output layer where θo ∈ Rh×p. gree. The ray returns the distance between the first obstacle θo The noises δi and δo of parameter space for exploration are it encounters and the host vehicle. If there are no obstacles, n × h and h × p matrices where they are sampled from zero it returns the maximum sensing range. We make the expert mean and ν standard deviation Gaussian distribution. In this demonstration using PPO with specific action controls. The paper, let θ be a set of θi and θo. δ means a set of δi and δo. results present the average of 16 experimental results. In the The pseudo-code of RAIL is represented in Algorithm 1. experiments, the trained weights through BC are used to fast The policy parameters θi and θo are initialized from be- convergencein GAIL and RAIL. This simulation study is inhavior cloning. In training procedure, the noises δ i andδ o spired by [Min and Kim, 2018]. We implemented the RAIL which mean the search directions in parameter space of pol- simulator based on Unity.
icy are chosen randomly for each iteration (line 2). Each Results. The purpose of experiments in Fig. 3 is to show set of selected N noises makes two policies in the current the sample efficiency. In order to assess the efficiency, avpolicy π . We collect 2 N rollouts and rewards from N erage speed, number of lane changes, number of overtakes, θ noisy policies π = θ ± νδ (line 3-6). The high longitudinal reward, and lateral reward were considered as t,k,± t k dimensional complex problems have multiple state compo- shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. In Table 1, it can be seen that nents with various ranges; and thus it makes the policies the two-layer policy resulted in the highest values of averto result in large changes in the actions when the same age speed and average overtaking statistics where the values sized changes are not equally influence state components. are 70.38 km/h and 45.04, respectively. This is because the Therefore, the state normalization is used in RAIL (line trained policies sometimes can achieve higher performance 4-5,14); and it allows policy π to have equal influ- than experts since GAIL-based frameworks perform policy t,i,± ence for the changes of state components when there are optimization based on the interaction with the environment.
state components with various ranges [Mania et al., 2018; On the other hand, the performance of single-layer policy Salimans et al., 2017; Nagabandi et al., 2018]. The discrim- shows 90% performancecompared to expert. This is because inator D gives the reward signal to update step. How- the single-layer is not enough to handle high dimensional obφ ever, since the trajectories for the training of the discrimi- servations properly. Aforementioned, BC tries to minimize nator can only be obtained from current policies π , a dis- 1-step deviation error along the expert demonstration. As a θ t criminator is trained whenever the policy parameter θ is up- result, the single-layer policy shows undesirableperformance t dated. The discriminator D finds the parameter φ which due to distribution mismatch between training and testing.
φ minimizes the objective function (3) (line 7-9). By using the In Fig. 4, a longitudinal reward is used to analyze the envireward signals from the discriminator, the policy weight is ronmental reward. The longitudinal reward is proportional to updated in the direction of +δ or −δ based on the result of the speed; and thus the normalized result shows the same re- (a) Normalized Speed. (b) Normalized Lane change. (c) Normalized Overtake.
Figure 3: The performance of trained policy according to the set number of expert trajectories (Average of 5 episodes).
(a) Normalized Longitudinal Rewards. (b) Lateral Rewards.
Figure 4: The rewards of trained policy according to the set number of expert trajectories (Average of 5 episodes).
sultas theaveragespeedas shownin Fig 3 a. Inordertoassess In summary, we verified that the proposed RAIL improves sensitivity to action decisions, a lateral reward was used. Un- the average speed and reduces the number of unnecessary til the lane change is completed, the host vehicle can change lane changes rather than BC. This means that the RAIL trains the decision according to the observation. Because the lateral driving policies in the correct directions. The experimental reward occurs continuously during lane change, the frequent results show that the two layer policy achieves desired perchanges during the operation lead to reward reduction. In formance similar to driving experts.
Fig. 4 b, the two-layer policy obtains a large lateral reward in the last case. However, the two-layer policy shows more lane 7 Conclusion changes than the expert. This is because the two-layer pol This paper proposes randomized imitation learning (RAIL) icy is less likely to change the decision during the operation.
for effect autonomous driving policy training which utilizes On the other hand, the single-layer policy shows the frequent ADAS functions to guarantee the safety of vehicles. The lane changes than the expert. The single-layer policy obtains RAIL is not only a derivative-free but also the simplest the smallest lateral reward. This is because the single-layer model-free reinforcement learning algorithm. Through the policy changes its decision frequently. BC shows the least proposed algorithm, the policies that successfully drive aunumber of lane changes. However, the trained policy obtains tonomous vehicles are trained via derivative free optimizalarger reward than the single-layer policy trained by RAIL.
tion. During the training procedure, the simple update step The number of lane change is considerably smaller than the makes the algorithm to be facile; and thus it makes the reconsingle-layer policy; and thus it leads to the trained policy obstruction results which get reasonableperformanceeasily. By tains larger lateral reward than the single-layer policy. The comparingthe performanceof the proposedmodel with comexperiment of Fig. 3 c was conducted to measure appropriplex deep reinforcement learning based methods, we demonate decisions to imitate the expert demonstration. In order strate that the proposed RAIL trains the policies that achieve to achieve the similar number of overtakes as the expert, the desired performance during autonomous driving. This relane change point and decision should be similar to the exsults can be a breakthroughto the commonbeliefthat random pert during the simulation. In Fig. 3 c, the two-layer policy search in the parameter space of policies can not be competishows the desired performance compared to expert. This retive in terms of performance. The evaluation results show the sult is related to the tendency (i.e., meaningless lane change possibility that autonomous vehicles can be controlled by the and decision change) which is shown in Fig. 3 b and Fig. 4 b.
policies which is trained by the proposed RAIL.
Furthermore,thedecisionpointsandactions aresimilar to the expert. However, the single-layer policy shows a lower num Acknowledgments ber of overtakes than the expert. This is because the average This research was supported by IITP grants funded by the speed is low as well as makes inappropriate lane change de Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2018-0-00170,Virtual Prescisions based on observation.
ence in Moving Objects through 5 G) and (MSIP) (No. 20170-00068,A Developmentof Driving Decision Enginefor Au- [Matyas, 1965] JM atyas. Randomoptimization. Automation tonomous Driving using Driving Experience Information). J. and Remote Control, 26(2):246–253,1965.
Kim is the correspondingauthor of this paper.
[Min and Kim, 2018] Kyushik Minand Hayoung Kim. Deep Q-learning based high level driving policy determination.
References In IV, 2018.
[Ahmed, 1999] Kazi I. Ahmed. Modeling drivers’ accelera- [Mnih et al., 2015] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, tion and lane changing behavior. Ph D thesis, MIT, 1999. David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidje- [Finn et al., 2016 a] Chelsea Finn, Paul Christiano, Pieter land, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. A connection between generdeep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2015.
ative adversarialnetworks, inversereinforcementlearning, andenergy-basedmodels. In NIPSW orkshopon Adversar- [Mukadam et al., 2017] Mustafa Mukadam, Akansel Cosial Training, 2016. gun, Alireza Nakhaei, and Kikuo Fujimura. Tactical decision making for lane changing with deep reinforcement [Finn et al., 2016 b] Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter learning. In NIPS Workshop MLITS, 2017.
Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control via policy optimization. In ICML, 2016. [Nagabandi et al., 2018] Anusha Nagabandi, Gregory Kahn, Ronald Fearing, and Sergey Levine. Neural network dy- [Guo et al., 2018] Yijie Guo, Junhyuk Oh, Satinder Singh, namics for model-based deep reinforcement learning with and Honglak Lee. Generative adversarial self-imitation model-free fine-tuning. In ICRA, 2018.
learning. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1812.00950,2018.
[Pan et al., 2018] Yunpeng Pan, Ching-An Cheng, Kamil [Henderson et al., 2017 a] Peter Henderson, Wei-Di Chang, Saigol, Keuntaek Lee, Xinyan Yan, Evangelos Theodorou, Pierre-Luc Bacon, David Meger, Joelle Pineau, and Doina and Byron Boots. Agile autonomousdriving using end-to Precup. Option GAN:Learningjointreward-policyoptions end deep imitation learning. In RSS, 2018.
using generative adversarial inverse reinforcement learning. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1709.06683,2017. [Pomerleau, 1989] Dean Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomousland vehiclein a neural network. In NIPS, 1989.
[Henderson et al., 2017 b] Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David [Pomerleau, 1991] Dean Pomerleau. Rapidly adapting artifi Meger. Deep reinforcement learning that matters. ar Xiv cial neural networks for autonomous navigation. In NIPS, preprint ar Xiv:1709.06560,2017. 1991.
[Ho and Ermon, 2016] Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. [Rajeswaran et al., 2017] Aravind Rajeswaran, Kendall Generative adversarial imitation learning. In NIPS, 2016. Lowrey, Emanuel V Todorov,and Sham Kakade. Towards generalization and simplicity in continuous control. In [Hoel et al., 2018] Carl-Johan Hoel, Krister Wolff, and Leo NIPS, 2017.
Laine. Automated speed and lane change decision making using deep reinforcement learning. ar Xiv preprint [Salimans et al., 2017] Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, ar Xiv:1803.10056,2018. Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement [Islam et al., 2017] Riashat Islam, Peter Henderson, Maziar learning. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1703.03864,2017.
Gomrokchi, and Doina Precup. Reproducibility of benchmarked deep reinforcement learning tasks for continuous [Schulman et al., 2015] John Schulman, Sergey Levine, control. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1708.04133,2017. Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region policy optimization. In ICML, 2015.
[Korssen et al., 2018] Tim Korssen, Victor Dolk, Joanna van de Mortel-Fronczak, Michel Reniers, and Maurice [Schulman et al., 2017] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Pra Heemels. Systematic model-based design and implemen- fulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proxtation of supervisors for advanced driver assistance sys- imal policy optimization algorithms. ar Xiv preprint tems. IEEE TITS, 2018. ar Xiv:1707.06347,2017.
[Kostrikov et al., 2019] Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna [Silver et al., 2016] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris Maddi Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and son, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driess Jonathan Tompson. Discriminator-actor-critic: Address- che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Paning sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of imitation learning. In ICLR, 2019. Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 2016.
[Mania et al., 2018] Horia Mania, Aurelia Guy, and Benjamin Recht. Simple random search provides a compet- [Ziebart et al., 2008] Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, itive approach to reinforcement learning. ar Xiv preprint J Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K Dey. Maximum entropy ar Xiv:1803.07055,2018. inverse reinforcement learning. In AAAI, 2008.
[Mao et al., 2017] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. Least squares generative adversarial networks. In ICCV, 2017.