The Progression of Transformers from Language to Vision to MOT: A Literature Review on Multi-Object Tracking with Transformers Abhi Kamboj Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Illinois Champaign, IL 61820 akamboj 2@illinois.edu Abstract The transformer neural network architecture allows for autoregressive sequence-tosequence modeling through the use of attention layers. It was originally created with the application of machine translation but has revolutionized natural language processing. Recently, transformers have also been applied across a wide variety of pattern recognition tasks, particularly in computer vision. In this literature review, we describe major advances in computer vision utilizing transformers. We then focus specifically on Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) and discuss how transformers are increasingly becoming competitive in state-of-the-art MOT works, yet still lag behind traditional deep learning methods.
1 Introduction A vital part of explainable video understanding is being able to detect and track objects in a video.
This yields the problem of object tracking. With the recent rise of the transformer architecture in deep learning, one may posit: how can the transformer architecture be leveraged to design effective object-tracking methods?
In this literature review, we describe the progression of the transformer idea from language, through computer vision and into multi-object tracking. We begin introducing transformers in Section 2. We further discuss how they progressed into the field of computer vision, specifically object detection in Section 3. Finally in Section 4, we delve into the problem of multi-object tracking. In particular, we highlight how the same concepts that evolved from language transformers to vision transformers are being applied in multi-object tracking methods. Despite this evolution of tranformers and selfattention, the best, highest performing, object tracking methods do not use transformers, indicating they may not be the best tool for multi-object tracking.
2 Introduction to Transformers 2.1 B.T.: Before Transformers Sequence to sequence modeling is the problem in which one sequence of inputs needs to be translated to a sequence of outputs. A common example of this is in machine translation, i.e. translating from one language to another. For many years, recurrent neural networks (RNN s) performed the best for these types of tasks. RNN s are uniquely able to input and output sequences of varying length by sharing parameters through time, i.e. an output depends on the previous time step’s output as well.
This method is able to perform time series prediction through updating and using hidden states [18].
4202 nu J 42 ]VC.sc[ 1 v 48761.6042:vi Xra The main issue with RNN s was that back-propagating the gradient through numerous time steps led to diminishing gradient values that negligibly contributed to gradient update steps, making the model difficult to train. Since the error vanishes through time this problem was termed vanishing gradients [21]. Many iterations of research worked on this issue and improved on the problem. Long short term memory (LSTM) introduced a set of learned gates to input or reset the hidden states and showed to capture long term dependencies better [22] and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU s) performed on par with LSTM s using significantly less gates and memory [10].
For many decades these RNN based auto-regressive models performed state of the art (SOTA) until Vaswani et al. 2017 [43] introduced transformers. A transformer applies the concept of attention in a novel fashion to a input of sequence. Compared to traditional RNN s, the attention mechanism essentially avoids the vanishing gradient problem by decreasing the path length between long range dependencies. Furthermore, compared to RNN s, the computational complexity per layer is less and overall more parallelizable. Specifically, a self attention layer is faster than a recurrent network layer when the sequence length n is less than than the representation’s dimensionality r, which is often the case. Table 1, modified from [43] furthers shows this comparison.
2.2 Explanation of Transformers A transformer functions through an encoder decoder architecture. The encoder reads an input sequence simultaneously and creates an intermediate representation. The decoder repeatedly uses that intermediate interpretation as well as the previous outputs of the sequence to produce the next output. The encoder decoder transformer architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
Within the encoder there are self attention modules which compute weighted dot products of each input with each other one. Each input is projected into keys, values, and queries and the values of each input is re-weighted by the soft-max scores of the corresponding query combined with each of the keys. Keys and queries are combined through dot products, but can also be combine through other similarity metrics [43]. Intuitively, the queries and keys give a higher score where the value needs to pay more attention to. In terms of machine translation, when understanding the meaning of sentence every word does not always provide information to every other word, but some words at arbitrary distances within the sentence will provide more useful meaning.
Figure 1: Transformer Architecture Image Self attention layers treat inputs as an ordered set, i.e. they taken from original CLIP paper, please refer are permutation equivariant. This helps model long range to [43] for more details.
dependencies in a parallelizable fashion since repeated dot products are repeated matrix multiplications. However, in many contexts the position of the input in a sequence does matter, so a positional encoding is appended or somehow included in each input vector. Positional encoding can be a fixed function of the input’s index in a sequence or a learned function [19].
2.3 Revolutionary Impacts of Transformers in Language Transformers had the largest and most immediate impact in natural language processing (NLP).
Before transformers, NLP was dominated by classical methods such as hidden Markov models, conditional random fields, Naive Bayes, and deep learning methods such as RNN s, LSTM s, etc. [25], and now almost every highly used language model is based off of transformers.
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) uses the transformer decoder in a autoregressive fashion to develop a robust representation of text that can be used for many NLP tasks[37]. Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) similarly learns a representation of natural language, however uses the transformer encoder to encode a sequence of text all at once using context 2 Figure 2: Vi T Overview Vi T splits an image into fixed sizes, embeds each chunk, adds positional encoding and feeds them through a standard transformer. Figure from [15] on both sides of the text [14]. Both GPT and BERT follow a pretraining paradigm, where massive models are pretrained in a self-supervised fashion online to create a natural language understanding that can be quickly fine tuned to down stream tasks.
3 Transformers in Computer Vision Deep learning has arguably dominated computer vision ever since the Image Net moment in 2015, when intelligent AI models were able to beat standard human recognition ability on image classification. Fueled by increasingly massive datasets, e.g. CIFAR [27], Imagenet [13], COCO [29], and massive improvements in GPU computation power, computers are able to more accurately and robustly perform vision tasks. Although transformers were originally designed for language translation and NLP tasks, they have now been adopted for vision tasks and are used as a backbone in many models.
3.1 Vision Transformer Vision Transformer (Vi T) is one of the first and widely used computer vision model that applies transformers successfully [15]. Notably, they are the first work to create a purely transformer based architecture that does not use any convolution layers. Their methodology shown in Fig. 2 casts image classification to a sequence-to-sequence problem, by dividing an image into subsquares and treating each as an input token in the sequence. To perform classification they embed an extra token and run its corresponding output through a multi-layer perception (MLP) to determine the class label for the image.
Dosovitskiy et al. [15] discover that large Vi T models performance scales with dataset size more rapidly then resnets. Training a large resenet model on a small dataset performs better than training a large Vi T model on a small dataset, however training a large resenet model on a large dataset performs worse than training a large Vi T model on a large dataset. This implies that Vi T model can capture image representations better across large amounts of data. In addition, Vi T models are more computationally parallelizable and thus require fewer computation resources to train.
Vi T’s higher representational power and lower computational consumption lends itself to be a strong candidate for large scale visual pretraining tasks. Foundation models is a new term for general multi-modal AI models trained on massive amounts of data in a self-supervised way which aim to obtain a general understanding of the data [6]. Some examples of foundation models include Florence 3 Figure 3: Vi T Performance in CLIP CLIP trained with a Vi T performance best compared to other state of the art models. Image taken from original CLIP paper, please refer to [36] for more details.
[50], Dall-E [38], CLIP[36], and ALIGN [24], notably all include a transformer and some even use Vi T directly.
Contrastive Language and Image Pretraing (CLIP) [36] uses a technique that utilizes an encoder architecture on both images and text to learn their correlations. They use a massive amount of data ( 400 million image-caption pairs) pulled from online and train in a self-supervised fashion called contrastive learning. CLIP beats baseline Res Net 50 models in 16 different zero shot learning tasks.
As shown in Fig. 3, CLIP trained with Vi T encoders consistently outperforms CLIP trained with Res Net and other convolution based based transfer learning models such as Efficient Net [41] or Big Transfer (Bi T) [26].
3.2 DETR The aforementioned advances in computer vision include classification and visual image pretraining, however these tasks involve broadly understanding visual representations. Transformers have also proven to effectively perform fine-grained computer vision tasks such as object detection and segmentation. Carion et al. [8] introduce a new framework called the Detection Transformer (DETR) that views object detection as a set prediction problem. DETR uses a CNN backbone to extract image features, and uses each feature as a token to a standard transformer encoder decoder architecture to produce bounding boxes as illustrated in Fig. 4. One main difference is during the decoder phase, instead of passing decoder outputs back as inputs autoregressively, the decoder learns n object queries to predict n output bounding boxes in parallel through back-propagation through the decoder’s cross attention modules.
Surprisingly, DETR did not become well known for its pure performance. In fact, it performs worse on detecting small objects and takes a very long time to train. Nonetheless, it is a simple architecture and it is extensible and relatively interpretable. Compared to other legacy SOTA object detection frameworks, such as Faster R-CNN, DETR does not need a region proposal network (RPN), non maximum suppression and region of interest alignment or any other hand designed components in a detection system. Some works such as YOLO [39] and SSD [30] claim to save hand designed additional components (e.g. RPN) for object detection through end-to-end neural network systems, however these works still rely on multiple implicit steps such as bounding box regression and IOU maximum suppression which DETR avoids altogether. Furthermore, through visualizing the 4 Figure 4: DETR Architecture First features are extracted using a CNN backbone, and positional encodings are concatenated to the features. Then features are fed into the encoder and used in the decoded along with learned object queries. Finally, the output s from the decoder are passed through a shared feedforward network that predicts either a detection (class and bounding box) or no detection (through the "no object" class). Image taken from original DETR paper, please refer to [8] for more details.
(a) DETR Attention Visualization The visualization of the attention scores of the DETR model on the image show that the when determining (b) Deformable DETR The graph shows the 10 x trainbounding boxes the model is focusing on the ex-ingspeedupof Deformable DETR.Imagemodifiedfrom tremities of objects. Image taken from original original Deformable DETR paper, please refer to [56] DETR paper, please refer to [8] for more details. for more details.
Figure 5: The left shows visualizations of detection using attention presented in DETR [8]. The right shows the speedup of deformable DETR from [56].
transformer attention of the network DETR provides a new interpretable perspective compared to these convolution-based architectures (Fig. 5 a).
Many works have built upon DETR, one of the most important such extensions is Deformable DETR [56]. Deformable DETR has shown a 10 x significant speedup in training time for similar performance metrics and is thus more widely used in practice . Intuitively, Deformable DETR uses deformable attention layers to learn which neighbors to attend to, thus requiring less inputs to be passed into the transformer over time. The significant speedup is shown in Fig. 5 b.
In this section we covered a few of the many impressive works using transformers to outperform existing computer vision tasks. Transformers in computer vision is still a very active research field and is still being adapted in novel ways to different tasks. In the next section we describe the impact transformers are having for one of these tasks, called Multi Object Tracking.
4 Multi Object Tracking 4.1 Problem description Visual Object Tracking (VOT) and Multi Object Tracking (MOT) are an extension of object detection to videos. Visual object tracking is a simpler problem where a detection in the first frame is given as input and the network has to provide a bounding box for that object in subsequent frames. Multi object tracking is a more challenging, yet realistic, extension where the goal is to provide a bounding box, classification label and instance track id for each object in each frame of a video[44]. However, it is not as simple as performing frame-by-frame detections since providing a track ID involves determining which objects are the same across frames. This introduces numerous challenges, and 3 of the main challenges are outlined below [48]: 5 Figure 6: Fragmentation and IDS in MOT The figure shows various cases for fragmentions and ID switches.
Image taken from original MOT 16, please refer to [35] for more details.
1. Track creation: During a video a new object can appear in the frames that has not been seen in previous frames. A model must be able to detect it as a new object and create a new track ID, instead of mislabeling it as a previously identified object. This is sometimes referred to as track birth.
2. Track termination: Objects may leave the frame in the middle of a video and the model must be able to recognize this and terminate that track ID. This is sometimes referred to as track death.
3. Reidentification (Re ID): Objects in videos often get occluded. For example a truck could come in front of a human or a ball could leave the frame bounce and come back. Being able to re-identify an object involves being able to terminate its track ID and revive the same track id when the object returns in the frame instead of creating a new instance label for it.
Other challenges include tracking through occlusions, background clutter and pose changes. Thus, most frameworks perform MOT in 2 high level steps. First, they perform object detection on images and then they associate each of those detections with track ID s across consecutive frames. The detections are canonically performed with pretrained SOTA object detectors, and the associations often use some sort of motion or appearance model.
There are many different applications of MOT such as tracking pedestrians or vehicles for autonomous driving, players on a court for sports analysis, groups of animals in the wilderness for biodiversity studies, etc [33]. As a result, there are many different datasets corresponding to each unique application.
The most widely used datasets are the MOT challenge datasets, namely MOT 16 [35] and it’s following iterations (MOT 17 and MOT 20 [12]). These datasets are mostly surveillance camera footage meant for tracking humans. The authors of the data sets do label cars, bicycles and motorcycles, but only use them as occlusions when calculating the precision and recall of human tracks.
Another major category of datasets include object tracking for autonomous driving such as Berkely Deep Drive (BDD) [49], and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and Toyota Technological Institute (KITTI) [20]. Recent works also introduce multi-purpose dataset sets, specifically Track Any Object (TAO) [11] has a long-tailed distribution of object classes where some objects appear less frequently than others, and TAO-Open World [31] contains novel objects and claims this is more real-world as any model will inevitably run into objects it has never seen before.
There are numerous MOT metrics because measuring tracking is a difficult objective. Perhaps the most widely used metric is the multi-object tracking accuracy (MOTA) which corresponds to how well the object can be tracked overall [35]. It combines three error sources: false positives, missed targets and identity switches (IDS). IDS is the number of times an object with a correct track ID switches to an incorrect track ID in the middle of the video. This is correlated with a with another metric called fragmentations (frag) where an object with an existing track ID appears in the image but goes unlabeled by the model or an object with an existing track ID is labeled in an image but the object left the image or is completely occluded (Fig. 6). An IDF 1 score is the ratio of correctly identified detections over the average number of ground truth and computed detections. Higher order tracking metric (HOTA) is another recent yet widely used metric that attempts to balance the different aspects of MOT better than MOTA, such as accurate detection, association and localization [32].
4.2 Tracking without Transformers Before transformers one of the main MOT methods was Simple Online and Realtime Tracking (SORT) [5]. This was the first method to perform tracking fast enough to be considered realtime.
As opposed to previous works that attempted to be robust for all edge cases SORT relies on simple 6 Figure 7: Siamese Network Concept The figure shows simple explanation of the concept behind a Siamese Network. The detection z from image x is passed through a different branch then the rest of the image and the branches output a filter which is convolved as a template with the original images feature map. Now x can be updated to be the next image in the frame while z remains to determine where that object track ID appears in the next image. Image taken from original Siam FC, please refer to [4] for more details.
and reliable frame to frame associations. They purposefully ignore Re ID since trying to account for it includes unnecessary complexity and precludes real time tracking. Instead they use classical tracking algorithms, such as Kalman filters for state estimate of each of the object ID s and the Hungarian algorithm for data association, with learned object detection models. An extension of SORT, Deep SORT [2] uses object appearances as well to improve Re ID of a person on the MOT 17 dataset. They also train a CNN to discriminate pedestrians offline, and apply it during the association step to decrease the IDS metric.
Around the same time as SORT, another common tracking method was through siamese networks such as Siam FC [4]. Siamese networks include 2 branches, one that learns the canonical object detection used for tracking and another that learns to associate objects through frames. The goal is to learn convolutional features of an object in one detection that can be used as a template or convolutional filter itself in the other branch. Siam FC refers to this second branch as similarity learning, where they try to learn a network that can tell if two objects are similar and gives it a higher score if so. The detections in the first branch essentially serve as "exemplar images" for the second branch to predict where that exact object was, by applying the learned filter or template for that object to all parts of the image (like a regular convolution) (Fig. 7).
Siam RPN [28] uses a similar idea of having one detection as a template for other objects on that track by computing the correlation between the template and the detections in the following images. This formulates the tracking problem as a one shot detection problem: use the template branch to predict weights for kernels in the RPN of an object detector and regress accordingly on those results. During inference, only the first frame runs through both branches then the template branch is turned off and the weights outputted from it are used in the RPN for the rest of the images detectors to perform tracking.
A work called Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE) [46] noticed that previous tracking works have two stages, one was outputting bounding boxes and features and the second is passing those detections through a separate Re ID network to correlate "appearance features" to label track ID s. JDE creates an end to end network to determine both object detections and object appearance embeddings at once. They test on MOT 16 and don’t out perform SOTA methods on the MOTA metric at their time, however, they get really close and perform 3 x faster, at 24 FPS "near real-time." Traktor [3] takes advantage of object detection RPN and bounding box regression methods to do tracking. They predict the object ID in the next frame by regressing previous bounding boxes on the current frame’s features maps to predict track ID s. They further provide an extension of their 7 mode, Traktor++ which adds a Re ID siamese network and motion model to perform association better. Traktor++ work achieved SOTA results on MOT 15,16, and 17 at that time (2019).
Center Track [53] is based off of a novel detection framework that detects objects as points (Center Net[54]). Tracking objects as points simplifies tracking conditioned detection as many objects can be represented as heatmaps of points. This condensed representation allows the next frame’s detector to be condition on multiple previous frames, which works well especially for low frame rate sequences where boxes between frames might not overlap, compared to detectors like Traktor [3] which relies on the overlap in the RPN to link detections into tracks. This is one of the first tracking works that trains on static images with aggressive data augmentation, i.e. they crop and shift detections to mimic motion and expand their training dataset.
[42] extends on Centertrack[53], specifically focusing on tracking through occlusions. Working off of KITTI, they claim to track pedestrians that are fully occluded by a vehicle. They do such by augmenting a recurrent memory module RNN to reason about object location and identity. Their custom synthetic Parallel Domain dataset they train on has groundtruth labels behind complete occlusions which warrants their success on KITTI.
AOA [16] is the first place winner in the TAO challenge. They argue that MOT trackers often learn both appearance and movement models but object movement is too unpredictable. They create a model that tracks objects based only on appearance. This aligns with their success in the Track Any Object Dataset because a ball or bird moves very differently from a car or person and predicting a general motion model for any object may lead to more errors than benefits. They use an ensemble of detection and Re ID networks to output multiple tracks which are then averaged or merged together.
Recently, a few more improved SORT methods have arisen. Strong SORT [17] improves Deep SORT with an appearance-free link to use only spatio-temporal information to predict whether tracklets (snippets of tracks across multiple frames) belong to the same ID or not. They also use guassian smoothed interpolation as opposed to linear interpolations for missing detections. OC-SORT [7], claims most models assume simple and linear motion, but instead if you have a more robust motion model you can perform well without an appearance model through occlusions and nonlinear motions.
This especially performed well on the Dance Track dataset where performers had similar costumes and appearances.
Byte Track [52] is a more recent SOTA method that attempts to revive dropped or fragmented tracks.
Their intuition follows that when an object is occluded or blurred through motion its bounding box prediction is going to be less confident, yet the detection should not be discarded. Instead Byte Track performs two rounds of associations, where it firsts associates track ID s to objects with high confidence detection results, and then associates the remaining track ID s to low confidence detections. As per its original motivation, Byte Track achieved SOTA IDF 1 and IDS scores when it came out.
4.3 Tracking with Transformers Soft data association (So DA) [23] uses attention to encode spatio-temporal dependencies and better track through occlusions, as shown by their low IDS score on the MOT 17 dataset. To our knowledge, Trans Track (2020) [40] is the first work to successfully apply the transformer model to tracking.
They apply object features from a previous frame as a query for the current frame and introduce the concept of track queries that are inputs to a decoder representing existing tracks. They still use the concept of object queries from DETR in a second decoder. The network essentially associates the track queries with detected objects from the object queries. The complete architecture is shown in Fig. 8. Similar to Trans Track, Trackformer[34] extends DETR almost directly using object and Track queries. Trackformer only has one decoder which does the heavy lifting part of the tracking, including the birth and death of tracks. Multiple-Object Tracking with Transformers (MOTR) [51], extends Trackformer with a Query Interaction Module which interacts with the decoder and more precisely handles the birth and death of track queries.
Trans MOT [9] points to issues in the Trans Track [40] line of work being that these works do not account for the spatial temporal structure of the object, and they require lots of computation.
Trans MOT represents detections in a frame as a graph and then use a transformer made from graph neural networks to create tracks.
8 Figure 9: Global Tracking Transformer Image taken from original GTR paper, please refer to [55] for more details.
Transcenter [47] argues existing tracking with transformers works are un-optimal given that their initial learned object and track queries are initialized by noise. They train a query learning network to get image-related dense prediction queries and sparse tracking queries and use those to perform tracking better.
Global Tracking Transformers (GTR) [55] provides a novel approach by using transformers only for tracking, instead of joint detection and tracking. They perform object detection first and send each of the detection crops across a temporal window of frames into a transformer. Using learned trajectory-queries, similar to track-queries in previous works, the transformer outputs a vector for each query scoring how well each input detection belongs to the corresponding query’s track ID (Fig. 9). This architecture is simple and lightweight and gains a lot of information from using a temporal window as opposed to simply the past 1 or 2 frames, however, it does not perform state of the art.
4.4 State of the Art Tracking Although transformers have performed extremely well on many tasks, whether they will outperform existing methods in object tracking is still uncertain. Papers with Code is a website that ranks existing works faster than they can be published for ongoing research tasks. Observing the MOT 17 benchmark on Papers with Code 1, the most widely used MOT benchmark, we see the top two per Figure 8: Trans Track Architecture Image formers are Bo T-SORT [1], and SMILE track [45]. Bo Ttaken from original Trans Track paper, please SORT combines motion, appearance, camera-motion and refer to [40] for more details.
Kalman filters to improve upon Byte Track and the original SORT algorithm. SMLE uses a similarity learning module motivated from Siamese networks to correlate objects to tracks. Ironically, the top SOTA models today are not one of the many transformer-related tracking papers but instead are using the first 2 foundational MOT frameworks we discussed above from about 7 years ago, SORT[5] and Siam FC[4].
5 Conclusion We have presented an extensive review of transformers in computer vision. We discuss the background of transformers and how they have impacted NLP. We further describe how they made their way 1 https://paperswithcode.com/sota/multi-object-tracking-on-mot 17 9 into computer vision and are having a tranformative impact on SOTA pretraining models and object detection. Finally, we dive into the field of Multi-Object Tracking and show how transformers are playing a role there. Although, transformers have performed well in MOT occasionally, current SOTA does not use transformers and the field is highly active.
References [1] Nir Aharon, Roy Orfaig, and Ben-Zion Bobrovsky. Bot-sort: Robust associations multi-pedestrian tracking.
ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2206.14651, 2022.
[2] Abdelbadie Belmouhcine, Julien Simon, Luc Courtrai, and Sébastien Lefèvre. Robust deep simple online real-time tracking. In 2021 12 th International Symposium on Image and Signal Processing and Analysis (ISPA), pages 138–144. IEEE, 2021.
[3] Philipp Bergmann, Tim Meinhardt, and Laura Leal-Taixe. Tracking without bells and whistles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 941–951, 2019.
[4] Luca Bertinetto,Jack Valmadre,Joao FH enriques,Andrea Vedaldi,and Philip HST orr. Fully-convolutional siamesenetworksforobjecttracking. In Europeanconferenceoncomputervision,pages 850–865.Springer, 2016.
[5] Alex Bewley, Zongyuan Ge, Lionel Ott, Fabio Ramos, and Ben Upcroft. Simple online and realtime tracking. In 2016 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP), pages 3464–3468. IEEE, 2016.
[6] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[7] Jinkun Cao, Xinshuo Weng, Rawal Khirodkar, Jiangmiao Pang, and Kris Kitani. Observation-centric sort: Rethinking sort for robust multi-object tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2203.14360, 2022.
[8] Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on computer vision, pages 213–229. Springer, 2020.
[9] Peng Chu, Jiang Wang, Quanzeng You, Haibin Ling, and Zicheng Liu. Transmot: Spatial-temporal graph transformer for multiple object tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2104.00194, 2021.
[10] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1412.3555, 2014.
[11] Achal Dave, Tarasha Khurana, Pavel Tokmakov, Cordelia Schmid, and Deva Ramanan. Tao: A large-scale benchmark for tracking any object. In European conference on computer vision, pages 436–454. Springer, 2020.
[12] Patrick Dendorfer, Hamid Rezatofighi, Anton Milan, Javen Shi, Daniel Cremers, Ian Reid, Stefan Roth, Konrad Schindler, and Laura Leal-Taixé. Mot 20: A benchmark for multi object tracking in crowded scenes.
ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2003.09003, 2020.
[13] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: Alarge-scalehierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 248–255.
Ieee, 2009.
[14] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[15] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16 x 16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[16] Fei Du, Bo Xu, Jiasheng Tang, Yuqi Zhang, Fan Wang, and Hao Li. 1 st place solution to eccv-tao-2020: Detect and represent any object for tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2101.08040, 2021.
[17] Yunhao Du, Yang Song, Bo Yang, and Yanyun Zhao. Strongsort: Makedeepsortgreatagain. ar Xivpreprint ar Xiv:2202.13514, 2022.
[18] Jeffrey L Elman. Finding structure in time. Cognitive science, 14(2):179–211, 1990.
[19] Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. Convolutional sequence to sequence learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1243–1252. PMLR, 2017.
[20] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2012.
[21] Sepp Hochreiter. The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent neural nets and problem solutions. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, 6(02):107–116, 1998.
[22] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[23] Wei-Chih Hung, Henrik Kretzschmar, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yuning Chai, Ruichi Yu, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Dragomir Anguelov. Soda: Multi-object tracking with soft data association. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2008.07725, 2020.
[24] Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4904–4916. PMLR, 2021.
10 [25] Wahab Khan, Ali Daud, Jamal A Nasir, and Tehmina Amjad. A survey on the state-of-the-art machine learning models in the context of nlp. Kuwait journal of Science, 43(4), 2016.
[26] Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Jessica Yung, Sylvain Gelly, and Neil Houlsby. Big transfer (bit): General visual representation learning. In European conference on computer vision, pages 491–507. Springer, 2020.
[27] Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
[28] Bo Li, Junjie Yan, Wei Wu, Zheng Zhu, and Xiaolin Hu. High performance visual tracking with siamese region proposal network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 8971–8980, 2018.
[29] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision, pages 740–755. Springer, 2014.
[30] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C Berg. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In European conference on computer vision, pages 21–37. Springer, 2016.
[31] Yang Liu, Idil Esen Zulfikar, Jonathon Luiten, Achal Dave, Deva Ramanan, Bastian Leibe, Aljoša Ošep, and Laura Leal-Taixé. Opening up open world tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 19045–19055, 2022.
[32] Jonathon Luiten, Aljosa Osep, Patrick Dendorfer, Philip Torr, Andreas Geiger, Laura Leal-Taixé, and Bastian Leibe. Hota: A higher order metric for evaluating multi-object tracking. International journal of computer vision, 129(2):548–578, 2021.
[33] Wenhan Luo, Junliang Xing, Anton Milan, Xiaoqin Zhang, Wei Liu, and Tae-Kyun Kim. Multiple object tracking: A literature review. Artificial Intelligence, 293:103448, 2021.
[34] Tim Meinhardt, Alexander Kirillov, Laura Leal-Taixe, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Trackformer: Multiobject tracking with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8844–8854, 2022.
[35] Anton Milan, Laura Leal-Taixé, Ian Reid, Stefan Roth, and Konrad Schindler. Mot 16: A benchmark for multi-object tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1603.00831, 2016.
[36] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
[37] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
[38] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
[39] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 779–788, 2016.
[40] Peize Sun, Jinkun Cao, Yi Jiang, Rufeng Zhang, Enze Xie, Zehuan Yuan, Changhu Wang, and Ping Luo.
Transtrack: Multiple object tracking with transformer. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2012.15460, 2020.
[41] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
[42] Pavel Tokmakov, Jie Li, Wolfram Burgard, and Adrien Gaidon. Learning to track with object permanence.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 10860–10869, 2021.
[43] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[44] Gaoang Wang, Mingli Song, and Jenq-Neng Hwang. Recent advances in embedding methods for multiobject tracking: A survey. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2205.10766, 2022.
[45] Yu-Hsiang Wang. Smiletrack: Similarity learning for multiple object tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2211.08824, 2022.
[46] Zhongdao Wang, Liang Zheng, Yixuan Liu, Yali Li, and Shengjin Wang. Towards real-time multi-object tracking. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 107–122. Springer, 2020.
[47] Yihong Xu,Yutong Ban,Guillaume Delorme,Chuang Gan,Daniela Rus,and Xavier Alameda-Pineda. Transcenter: Transformers with dense queries for multiple-object tracking. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2103.15145, 2021.
[48] Yingkun Xu, Xiaolong Zhou, Shengyong Chen, and Fenfen Li. Deep learning for multiple object tracking: a survey. IET Computer Vision, 13(4):355–368, 2019.
[49] Fisher Yu, Haofeng Chen, Xin Wang, Wenqi Xian, Yingying Chen, Fangchen Liu, Vashisht Madhavan, and Trevor Darrell. Bdd 100 k: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous multitask learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2636–2645, 2020.
[50] Lu Yuan, Dongdong Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Noel Codella, Xiyang Dai, Jianfeng Gao, Houdong Hu, Xuedong Huang, Boxin Li, Chunyuan Li, et al. Florence: A new foundation model for computer vision. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2111.11432, 2021.
11 [51] Fangao Zeng, Bin Dong, Yuang Zhang, Tiancai Wang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Yichen Wei. Motr: End-to-end multiple-object tracking with transformer. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 659–675.
Springer, 2022.
[52] Yifu Zhang, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Dongdong Yu, Fucheng Weng, Zehuan Yuan, Ping Luo, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Bytetrack: Multi-object tracking by associating every detection box. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1–21. Springer, 2022.
[53] Xingyi Zhou,Vladlen Koltun,and Philipp Krähenbühl. Trackingobjectsaspoints. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 474–490. Springer, 2020.
[54] Xingyi Zhou, Dequan Wang, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Objects as points. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1904.07850, 2019.
[55] Xingyi Zhou, Tianwei Yin, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Global tracking transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8771–8780, 2022.
[56] Xizhou Zhu, Weijie Su, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Xiaogang Wang, and Jifeng Dai. Deformable detr: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:2010.04159, 2020.
12