PIM-GPT: A Hybrid Process-in-Memory Accelerator for Autoregressive Transformers Yuting Wu*, Ziyu Wang*, Wei D. Lu Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA {wuyt,ziwa,wluee}@umich.edu Abstract Decoder-only Transformer models such as GPT have demonstrated exceptional performance in text generation, by autoregressively predicting the next token. However, the efficacyofrunning GPT oncurrenthardwaresystemsisbounded by low compute-to-memory-ratio and high memory access.
Process-in-memory (PIM) architectures can minimize offchip data movement and utilize high internal bandwidth.
They stand out as promising candidates for accelerating memory-bounded tasks such as GPT inference.
In this work, we propose a PIM accelerator, PIM-GPT, which achieves end-to-end acceleration of GPT inference with high performance and high energy efficiency. PIM-GPT Figure 1. (a) Parameter and computation cost comparisons leverages DRAM-based PIM designs for executing multiply- of GPT s and Res Net-18. (b) Operation/parameter ratios of accumulate (MAC) operations directly in the DRAM chips, CNN and GPT models.
eliminatingtheneedtomovematrixdataoff-chip.Non-linear functions and data communication is supported by an application specific integrated chip (ASIC). At the software level, of existing hardware such as the GPU, particularly for small mapping schemes are designed to maximize data locality batch inference tasks.
and computation parallelism by concatenating and partition Compared to CNN s, GPT has two main features : (1) exing matrices among DRAM channels and banks to utilize all tremely large model size and (2) low compute-to-memoryavailablein-memorycomputationunits.Theefficiencyofthe ratio. As shown in Figure 1, the GPT 3-XL model consists PIM-GPT architecture is verified through circuit synthesis of 1.15 billion parameters [2], more than a hundred times and an event-driven clock-cycle accurate simulator. Overhigherthancommon CNN ssuchas Res Net-18[15],whilethe all, PIM-GPT achieves 41−137×, 631−1074× speedup and arithmetic intensity per parameter (ops/parameter) is only 123−383×, 320−602× energy efficiency over GPU and CPU 2.1, much lower than that of 48.4 in Res Net-18. These feabaseline on 8 GPT models with up to 1.4 billion parameters.
tures mean large amounts of data have to be access through off-chip memory, while the massive amount of parallel computingunitson GPU willbeseverelyunder-utilized,resulting 1 Introduction in penalties in both performance and energy consumption.
Attention-based Transformer models have revolutionized In the context of token generation in GPT, self-attention and natural language processing (NLP) [37]. Transformer modthe feed-forward networks (FFN s) rely on vector-matrix mulels including GPT and BERT have demonstrated superior tiplication (VMM) instead of the more GPU-friendly matrixperformance in many NLP tasks such as text generation matrix multiplication used for processing the entire sen- [6][33], text classification [36][3][9], and machine transtences. In addition, these VMM operations are characterized lation [40][41] compared to convolution neural networks by low data reuse as the weight values in the matrix are (CNN s)orrecurrentneuralnetworks(RNN s).GPT inparticuemployed only once, in contrast to convolution operations larhasattractedwidespreadpublicinterestintextgeneration.
where extensive reuse of the same weight is feasible.
GPT is a decoder-only Transformer model that generates Recently, several Transformer accelerators have been procontext in an autoregressive manner by producing a single posed to accelerate GPT inference [39][18][44]. However, token at a time [33]. The sequential processing feature of these designs generally suffer from the following drawbacks: GPT, on the other hand, results in notable under-utilization (1) expensive hardware overhead such as the usage of highbandwidth memory (HBM) and dense in-memory logic; (2) *Equal Contribution;listingorderdeterminedbyrandomdicerolling. modelcustomizationsuchasmodelandtokenpruning,which 1 4202 rp A 41 ]RA.sc[ 2 v 58390.0132:vi Xra will make the architecture less flexible and cause accuracy loss; (3) lack of end-to-end acceleration as most studies only focus on the attention computation and feed-forward layers. Moreover, many existing Transformer accelerators are designed for encoder-only models like BERT, instead of decoder-only models like GPT [13][14][19][43][38][4][42].
DRAM-based process-in-memory (PIM) is a promising architecturetoacceleratememory-boundedtasks[31][10].The high storage capacity of DRAM allows all model parameters to be stored on chip. By integrating computation elements onto the DRAM chip, PIM allows the data to be consumed locally, utilizing high internal bandwidth and minimizing offchip data movement. In principle, the placement of computation units for multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations can be distributed across various regions, including sub-array, bank, I/O driver and logic die. Among these choices, placing MAC units at the bank level provides a favorable balance between performance, energy consumption and area cost [35]. Recent PIM developments indeed demonstrate efficient acceleration of MAC operations by integrating computation Figure 2. Transformer architectures of BERT and GPT.
components at the bank level [25][26][27][23].
In this work, we propose PIM-GPT, a complete hardwaresoftware solution for GPT inference acceleration. At the hardware level, PIM-GPT is a hybrid system that includes energy efficiency over GPU and CPU baseline, for 8 DRAM-based PIM chips to accelerate VMM near data and GPT models with up to 1.4 billion parameters.
an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) to support other functions that are too expensive for PIM including necessary non-linear functions, data communication and in 2 Background and Motivation structions for the PIM chips. At the software level, mapping 2.1 Transformer Models scheme is optimized to efficiently support the GPT dataflow.
To accommodate the large model size and improve perfor- Figure 2 illustrates the typical structure of a Transformer mance, the computation workloads are evenly distributed model, which uses a self-attention mechanism that captures across available PIM channels and banks to maximize uti- the relationship between different words in the sentence lization of compute resources and on-chip bandwidth. Com- [37]. The original Transformer model consists of an enpared to existing Transformer accelerators [39][18][44], the coderandadecoder,bothcontaining N identicaltransformer proposed PIM-GPT supports large GPT models end-to-end blocks. Each block includes a self-attention module and a without the need of expensive HBM, making it an efficient FFN. Among them, BERT and GPT are the two most popular and practical solution for GPT acceleration. Benchmarking language models. Different from the encoder-only BERT that analysis shows the proposed PIM-GPT achieves state-of-the- processes all input tokens at once [6], GPT is a decoder-only art speedup and energy efficiency for GPT inference tasks. model which typically handles a single token at once and The main contributions are as follows: generatesthenexttokeninasequentialmannerbyattending to all previous tokens [2]. Despite the differences, these two • Wedesignahybridsystemtoaccelerate GPT inference models share similar blocks, as shown in Figure 2.
end-to-endusing PIM withminimalchangesto DRAM For GPT, the input token is first transformed into a vector 𝑑 𝑑 architecture, making it a practical solution. of dimension 𝑚 by the input embedding layer, where 𝑚 • We propose an optimized mapping scheme that maxi- is the feature dimension of the model. The processed token mizes data locality and distributes workloads across is then fed into the Transformer blocks. The input token is PIM channels and the ASIC to achieve high computa- first multiplied with three linear transformation matrices 𝑊 tion parallelism and efficiency. ( 𝐾,𝑄,𝑉) to obtain Query (q) , Key (k) and Value (v) vectors, • We analyze performance, energy efficiency, and sensi- where 𝑊 𝐾 ∈ R𝑑 𝑚×𝑑 𝑘, 𝑊 𝑄 ∈ R𝑑 𝑚×𝑑 𝑘, 𝑊 𝑉 ∈ R𝑑 𝑚×𝑑 𝑣. The tivityofthecompletesystemthroughcircuitsynthesis current Key and Value vectors k, v are then concatenated and a clock-cycle accurate simulator. to the Key, Value matrices from the previous inputs. The q • PIM-GPT achieves state-of-the-art performance 41− vector and Key, Value matrices are then passed to the self 137×, 631−1074× speedup and 123−383×, 320−602× attention heads to capture the dependencies between tokens 2 with the following equation: logic near DRAM banks and can take advantage of the large internal bandwidth [25][27]. By balancing the computation 𝑞𝐾𝑇 Attention (𝑞,𝐾,𝑉) = softmax(√ )𝑉 (1) logic design and bank organization, PNM based PIM can 𝑑 𝑘 achieve both high-performance and energy efficiency.
To allow the model to learn different relationships for each token, multi-head attention technique is adopted. The 2.3 Motivation inputvectorsaresplitacrossattentionheads,andeachchunk Throughput-optimized processors like GPU s do not effecgoes through a separate head in parallel. All head outputs tively accelerate autoregressive token generation due to the are combined by a linear projection layer to produce the memory-bounded and sequential feature of decoders, particfinal attention output. Following the multi-head attention, ularly for inference tasks without batching. These architecthe attention output is fed into the FFN, which consists of tures suffer from intensive data transfer of large weight matwo fully-connected layers with Gaussian Error Linear Unit trices, where the off-die data movement and DRAM interface (GELU) activation function [17] in between. The output from have a significant energy consumption overhead [21][32].
the attention block is then applied as inputs to the next block Earlier PIM implementations focus on VMM acceleration for subsequent processing, repeating through N attention in neural networks. But inter-layer functions in GPT such blocks. Afterwards, a final output layer predicts the next toas Layer Norm and Residual can contribute ∼ 10% of total ken. The content is generated autoregressively by repeating latency [18]. Hence, efficient end-to-end PIM acceleration of this process until reaches the required token length.
GPT inference is of high interest.
BERT processes all input tokens in parallel and produces PIM is a promising approach to relieve the memory botthe outputs at once. Its core computation is matrix-matrix tleneck by storing matrix and performing VMM in memory.
multiplication,andtheperformanceistypicallycomputation With weight matrices stationary in memory, only the input bounded. In contrast, the core computation of autoregressive and output vectors will be transferred though the DRAM models such as GPT is the much lighter VMM in both multiinterface. Hence, the memory access complexity can be rehead attention and FFN layers. As a result,the arithmetic duced from O(𝑛2) to O(𝑛).
Considering the high costs of intensity of GPT is relatively low but the required memory addinglogicto DRAM,itismoreefficienttoexecutenon-data access is high. As a result, compute-dense architectures such intensive operations in a separate chip to achieve efficient as GPU s are not efficient for GPT inference, while PIM techend-to-end GPT acceleration. Besides hardware architecniques that leverage high internal bandwidth of DRAM chips ture advances, efficient workload distribution and dataflow are promising for GPT acceleration.
management are required to fully exploit the high internal bandwidth of PIM. The proposed PIM-GPT is an end-to-end 2.2 DRAM-based PIM GPT accelerator with practical considerations in hardware DRAM-based PIM architectures are promising candidates implementation.
since DRAM is the mainstream memory in today’s computing systems. The DRAM bank is a two-dimensional array of 3 PIM-GPT Architecture memory cells with a 1 T 1 C structure, as shown in the inset 3.1 System Overview of Figure 3(c). The cell represents the binary values of “1” or “0” by the presence or absence of charge. When reading PIM-GPT is a memory-centric acceleration system aimed to data from a DRAM bank, the wordline will be activated and support Transformer-based autoregressive token generation data stream from an entire row will be offloaded to the row- models including GPT. The PIM-GPT system is shown in buffer. Employing computation units to directly access and Figure 3, which composes of PIM chips and a custom deconsume data in the row-buffer is very efficient. However, signed ASIC. The design principle of PIM is to maximally the DRAM fabrication process is highly constrained. It only leverage data locality and parallelism to achieve high system containsthreemetallayersthatseverelylimitthecomplexity performance and energy efficiency during VMM in attention of the circuit, and the transistors are 3× slower than those in and FFN. To achieve efficient VMM, PIM-GPT strategically logic chips at the same node [5][12]. Therefore, only limited partitionsthemodel,takinghardwareresourcesintoaccount.
logic and buffers can be integrated on DRAM-based PIM. It achieves parallel computing by broadcasting a single vec DRAM-based PIM can be divided into (1) process-using- tor and reducing instruction overhead. PIM-GPT employs a memory (PUM) and (2) process-near-memory (PNM). The specific mapping scheme for attention mechanism, as shown first approach supports computing in DRAM banks or sub- in Figure 3(a). Weight values from multiple attention heads arrays. It can yield higher level of parallelism and less data are concatenated to accommodate the physical capacity of movement. However, to enable in-bank computation, exten- DRAM banks. The concatenated attention matrices, along sive modifications to the subarray architecture are needed withweightsin FFN layers,aredistributedtoallchannelsand [28][8][20]. Additionally, only a limited instruction set is banks for parallel operation, following the mapping scheme supported. The second approach implements computation in Figure 4, details of which will be elaborated in Section 3 Figure 3. PIM-GPT system overview. (a) Hardware-aware GPT model partition. (b) Compilation of computation stream to command stream. (c) A complete PIM-GPT hardware architecture.
concatenated to a large matrix to utilize parallel computing capability as well as maximize data locality.
To facilitate end-to-end acceleration of large GPT models, non-VMM functions are executed on the ASIC chip. It is essential to highlight that PIM-GPT targets the elimination of off-chip movement of matrix data, requiring only the transfer of input/output vectors between PIM and ASIC for downstream computations, as well as data communication and intermediate data storage. This integration approach leverages the strengths of both PIM and ASIC, optimizing their capabilities to accelerate various computation tasks in the GPT computation stream with minimized data movement between them. Figure 3(b) illustrates the compilation ➍ ➎ of Attention and Softmax to command streams for the PIM and ASIC chips, respectively. All data in PIM-GPT are in bfloat 16 (BF 16) format, which preserves the approximate dynamic range of 32-bit floating point number to balance Figure 4. Multi-bank mapping scheme for VMM operation.
performance and accuracy.
Colors represent the different rows in the original matrix.
3.2 DRAM-based PIM for VMM 4. PIM-GPT utilizes the mature PIM solution with a MAC Placing MAC units and SRAM buffer inside DRAM modules unit integrated at a bank, which can be easily adopted from has been widely used in PIM architectures for machine learnexisting LPDDR 4 [35] or GDDR 6 [27] design, making it a ing applications to minimize the memory access [35][25][27] practical solution. The system integrates 8 channels, each [16]. PIM-GPT places the MAC units at every bank. And all of which executing VMM locally by broadcasting the vec- 16 banks can perform MAC simultaneously, as shown in tor from the buffer and loading matrices from DRAM bank Figure 5(a). Such MAC units arrangement has been proved arrays, as shown in Figure 3(c). feasible in both GDDR 6 and HBM prototypes [25][27]. Take A high-level mapping scheme for VMM operation in PIM- GDDR 6-based PIM as an example, placing MAC unit per GPT is shown in Figure 4. Since each row of the matrix is bank offers 512 GB/s peak bandwidth per channel at 1 GH z multipliedbythesamevector,therowsaredistributedacross (256 bits/bank × 16 banks). An SRAM buffer will be used to all banks. When the VMM begins, the vector is broadcasted store and broadcast the input vector. However, integrating to all banks and multiplied with matrix data from each bank large SRAM buffers into DRAM is expensive and impracin parallel. If the matrix dimension exceeds the physical tical. To provide a practical solution of GPT acceleration, storage of a bank row, it will be divided into chunks for map- we adopt 2 KB buffer size from [27], and broadcast vectors ping and computation. Similarly, multi-attention heads are to all MAC units for parallel computing. When the input 4 Figure 6. ASIC architecture of the PIM-GPT system.
Figure 5. DRAM PIM organization. (a) A channel is com- hardware cost and improve efficiency, PIM-GPT only perposed of a global buffer and 16 banks. A bank contains (b) a forms VMM operations in the PIM while assigning all other conventional DRAM bank and (c) a MAC unit with multipli- computations, such as data bypassing, division and activaers and an adder tree. tion functions, to the ASIC. By doing so, the design allows the integration of lightweight MAC units to the DRAM chip to consume data locally without significantly sacrificing the length exceeds the buffer size, vectors will be truncated into memory capacity.
chunks, as shown in Figure 4. Partial MAC results will be computed and forwarded to the SRAM on the ASIC,followed 3.3 ASIC Architecture by downstream partial sum execution on the ASIC. Com The ASIC in PIM-GPT is used to support non-VMM arithpared to writing back to DRAM, forwarding the subportion metic computations, manage data communication and inof VMM results to ASIC reduces overall latency. Eliminating termediate data storage. The ASIC architecture is shown in writing back also frees DRAM to perform subsequent VMM s.
Figure 6. Since VMM operations are performed in the PIM The bank organization is identical to conventional DRAM channels, data will only be read from DRAM when a VMM architectures, as shown in Figure 5(b). Once a row address is operation is done and requires downstream operations. The decoded, the entire corresponding row will be activated and PIM channels communicate with the ASIC through memory all stored data will be forwarded to the row buffer. Herein, if bus and crossbar interconnects. The interconnects support the bank is not closed (precharged), data will be preserved data fetching from any DRAM channel and sending memory in the row buffer. Reading data from the row buffer is much requests to a single channel or broadcasting to all channels fasterthanfromthebankarray,sinceitskipsthelonglatency after packeting the data with address. Data read from PIM row activation step. Hence, to maximize the utilization of have two possible paths on the ASIC: (1) writing back to peak internal bandwidth, data should be consumed from banks in other PIM channels, such as Key, Value matrices the row buffer as extensively as possible. This requires bank for subsequent VMM, and (2) going through computation scheduling adheres to the open-row policy, wherein a row blocks in the ASIC, such as Layer Norm, Softmax, etc.
is not immediately precharged after data access. The goal If the data require downstream computation, they will be is to employ this policy and optimally map the model to temporarily stored in the on-chip SRAM. The computation efficiently consume matrix data. In our mapping scheme, engines on ASIC are responsible for computations that canmatrix rows for VMM are partitioned and directly mapped not be run as MAC s, such as non-linear activation functions, to the same row addresses, thereby maximizing the row hit layernormalization,softmaxandpartialsum.Theaddersand rate, as outlined at a high level in Figure 4.
multipliers in the computation engines follow the standard Inside each bank, only multipliers and an adder tree are floating-point unit design to support summation and multiimplemented for MAC operation, as shown in Figure 5(c).
plication. For design reuse and performance considerations, Similar architecture has been proven effective in prior deother computation tasks are implemented with approximasigns [27][7][16]. During MAC operation, 16 vector values tion algorithms using only addition and multiplication to and the corresponding weights are fetched from the buffer achieve the required precision.
and banks, respectively. The 16 multipliers multiply the vec Three functions that require approximation are: (1) Softtor data with weights. The adder tree accumulates the multimax 𝑠(𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝑒𝑥𝑖 ; (2) Layer Norm 𝑦 = √ 𝑥−𝐸[𝑥] ×𝛾 + 𝛽 ; plication results for downstream computation. To minimize Σ𝑁 𝑗=1 𝑒𝑗 𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝑥]+𝜖 5 Algorithm 1: Newton-Raphson Division Algorithm 2: Fast Inverse Square Root Data: BF loat 16 𝐷 = (𝑆)𝑀 × 2 𝐸 Data: BF loat 16 𝐷 = (𝑆)𝑀 × 2 𝐸 Result: BF loat 16 1 Result: BF loat 16 √ 1 𝐷 𝐷 /* Scale by exponent subtraction */ 𝐷′ = 𝐷 × 0 . 5 1 1 𝐷′ = 𝐷/2 (𝐸+1) /* Unpack data and pad with 0 */ 2 𝑋 = 48 − 32 × 𝐷′ uint 32_t 𝐿 ← {unpack( 𝐷′ ), 0 x 0000} 17 17 2 3 for iter in ⌈log 2 lo 𝑃 g +1 17 ⌉ do 3 𝐿′ = 0 x 5 f 3759 df −𝐿 >> 1 2 𝑋 = 𝑋 +𝑋 × (1 − 𝐷′ ×𝑋) /* Keep 16 high bits */ 4 5 end 4 BF loat 16 𝑋 ← pack( 𝐿′ )[31 : 16] /* Scale the result */ for iter in Iter Num do 5 6 𝑋′ = 𝑋/2 (𝐸+1) 6 𝑋 = 𝑋 × (1 . 5 − 𝐷′ ×𝑋 ×𝑋) end 7 (3)GELU(𝑥) = 𝑥 ×[1+𝑒𝑟𝑓 (√ 𝑥 )], which can be approximated 2 2 by 𝑥 × [1 + tanh √︁ 2/𝜋(𝑥 + 0 . 044715 ×𝑥3)].
of all PIM channels, followed by broadcasting to all MAC 2 𝑒𝑥 𝑥 The nonlinear function , tanh , division and square units, as depicted in Figure 7. All MAC units will execute root in these functions cannot be naively computed using MAC of the same vector on different matrix partitions in paraddition and multiplication. Under given precision and data allel to fully utilize the PIM computation resources without range, they can be efficiently approximated and converge instruction overhead. PIM-GPT implements the following 𝑒𝑥 𝑥 in rapid iterations. Here and tanh are computed using techniques to coordinate workload between the PIM chan Taylor series approximation with the first six items, which nels and the ASIC: (1) The partial outputs of VMM can be can be computed with addition and multiplication.
forwarded to the ASIC before the whole computation is com The division operation is computed by multiplying the pleted, which effectively eliminates the data write back to numerator with the inverse of the denominator. Both the DRAM banks; (2) When input vector length exceeds the reciprocal and inverse square root operations can be calcubuffer size, SRAM buffer on the ASIC are reserved to store lated with addition and multiplication following Newton’s intermediatedataandthe ASIC willaccumulatepartial VMM method. A proper initial value is required to ensure the fast results from DRAM; (3) Pipelining between data transmisconvergence. For reciprocal, we take advantage of Newtonsion and computation, i.e. the ASIC will start operations on Raphson division in Algorithm 1. The fast inverse square partially received vector while the rest are in transmission.
root algorithm is adopted from Quake III Arena’s source Mapping a model includes storing the weights to the allocode [1], as shown in Algorithm 2.
cated banks, as well as reserving space for the intermediate The Newton-Raphson Division algorithm shown in Algodata (Key, Value matrices) for attention computation since rithm 1 isfriendlyforfloatingpointnumberssinceitrequires they are dynamically expanded with token generation. To the input D to scale to a value close to 0, which can be easenhance the system performance, the mapping scheme is ily done with exponent subtraction and mantissa shift in optimized to: (1) maximize row hit rate by exploiting data floating point data format. The P in line 3 is the precision of locality; (2) increase computational parallelism by balancing P binary places. Hence, for a 16-bit floating point number, the workload across DRAM banks; and (3) reduce latency it will take three iterations to get an accurate result. The by minimizing data movement. At runtime, the system comfast inverse square root algorithm in Algorithm 2 unpacks putes the bank address in the reserved space to write back the BF 16 data into 16-bit integer data and padding 16-bit Key and Value vectors. The high-level description of the zeros to get an accurate approximation, followed by shift mapping scheme is shown in Algorithm 3.
and subtraction from a constant. The pack step utilizes the 𝐿′ 16 high bits of INT 32 to assemble a BF 16 data’s sign bit, 4.2 Mapping Methods exponent and mantissa. In the fast square root algorithm, Attention Head Mapping: it can converge in a single step iteration. Here we take a As shown in Figure 7, the mapping scheme leverages data conservative two step iteration.
locality and maximizes computation parallelism. Since activation (ACT) and precharge (PRE) commands are expensive 4 PIM-GPT Dataflow in both latency and energy, achieving a high row hit rate is 4.1 Overview preferred. To this end, matrix data used for MAC operations PIM-GPT aims to distribute workloads among all PIM chan- need to be mapped to consecutive physical DRAM cells. This nels and ASIC efficiently. For VMM operation, the input approach means the corresponding row only needs to be vector is forwarded from the ASIC buffer to the SRAM buffer activated once to transfer all required data to the row buffer, 6 Algorithm 3: Model Mapping to PIM Banks Data: Computation Graph; PIM Configuration Result: Memory Mapping and Reservation /* Map weights to PIM banks */ for vmm Block in Computation Graph do 1 if vmm Block.multi Head then 2 hit Score ← max Row Hit(nhead, ncol) 3 vmm Block ← concat(hit Score, vmm Block) 4 end 5 Mapping ← max Parallel(vmm Block, nch, nbank) 6 end 7 /* Reserve PIM bank rows for kv */ for wr Block in Computation Graph do 8 if block == write_k then 9 hit Score ← max Row Hit(nhead, ncol, ltoken) 10 wr Block ← concat(hit Score, wr Block) 11 end 12 Mapping ← Reserve(wr Block, ltoken, nch, nbank) 13 Figure 7. Mapping strategy for the Key Matrix. (a) Multi- 14 end head attention. (b) Concatenating multi-head to exploit data locality. (c) Distributing weight matrix evenly across channels and banks to maximize computation parallelism.
write-back are in row-major and column-major, respectively, since the transpose of Key matrix is required in Equation 1, and the MAC units can keep consuming data already in the while not for Value matrix.
opened row to minimize ACT and PRE operations. PIM-GPT exploits data locality during write. During a to To take advantage of the data locality, it is desired that a ken generation, a Key vector is produced by multi-attention row is fully mapped with data. However, a single attention heads, which is corresponding to 𝑁 = 1 in Figure 7(a). The head can be much smaller than the DRAM array dimension. Key vectors with length of 64 from 12 heads are concate As shown in Figure 7(a), attention head width of GPT 2-small nated to form a vector with length of 768, and written to is 64 while a bank row can store 1024 16-bit data. To maxi- the corresponding bank row reserved for the current token.
mize the row hit rate, all attention heads in the same layer The concatenated Key vectors produced by all token generare concatenated to fill up the DRAM bank. Take GPT 2-small ation steps are evenly stored across all channels and banks as an example, 12 attention heads are concatenated to form for parallel downstream VMM computation. Value results a wider matrix with width of 768, along with the concatena- are stored in column-major fashion because transpose is tion of input vectors, as shown in Figure 7(b). To maximize not required. To maximize the computation parallelism in the utilization of MAC units, rows of the matrix are evenly the subsequent VMM, we distribute the Value matrix to all distributed across PIM channels and banks. Figure 7(c) is a channels and banks using the same mapping scheme for Key 𝐾 detailed example showing how the matrix are mapped matrix mapping as shown in Figure 7(c).
through 8 PIM channels, assuming the token length is 256. Weight Matrix Tiling: First, attention heads in a layer are concatenated along col- For larger GPT models, widths of both concatenated multiumn direction to form a larger matrix, with a dimension of head matrices and weight matrices in the FFN layers can 256 × 768. The concatenated matrix is mapped following the exceed the capacity of a bank row. In this circumstance, the rowmajorapproachandevenlydistributedas 32 matrixrows input vector length also exceeds the buffer size. Hence, both to each channel, as indicated by the rainbow colors in Figure the matrix and the vector need to be truncated for VMM 7(b) and (c). Inside each channel, all 16 banks are mapped operation, as shown in Figure 4. The partial VMM results are with 2 rows of the matrix and execute MAC operations with then accumulated in the ASIC to facilite pipelined operation.
the same vector in parallel. Taking the input length of 2048 in Figure 4 as an example, Intermediate Data Memory Reservation: the matrix and the vector are sliced into two chunks. The Key and Value results need to be written back to the PIM elements in the same row will always be mapped to the same banks and append to the existing Key and Value matrices. bank, as indicated by the faded color. Computation on the In the mapping stage, PIM-GPT reserves the required space second chunk starts after the first chunk is completed to in PIM banks for these intermediate data. Key and Value avoid frequently overwriting the SRAM buffer. The weight 7 matrix tiling scheme distributes matrices evenly to achieve valuesareobtainedfrom DDR 5 datasheet[30]andmultiplied the highest possible DRAM channel-wise and bank-wise by 3 to account for the current consumption increase during MAC computation parallelism. parallel bank operations [23]. The GDDR 6 I/O access energy 5.5 p J/bit is adopted from GDDR 6 datasheet [29]. The system 5 System Evaluation performance in latency and power efficiency is evaluated based on these conservative assumptions. Detailed hardware 5.1 Evaluation Method configuration is summarized in Table 1.
Hardware Configuration To perform realistic estimates, Simulation Configuration Toevaluatethe PIM-GPT sysweuse GDDR 6-based PIM prototypereportedfrom SKH ynix tem performance, we developed an event-driven clock-cycle for performance evaluation [27]. The design only integrates accurate simulator in C++ that models the system behavior lightweight MAC units near banks. The area of one processat token generation runtime. The simulator takes the GPT ing unit (PU) is 0.19 𝑚𝑚2 [27]. All logic components of the model and system configuration as inputs for model map ASIC are synthesized with System Verilog using Synopsys ping. The computation graph is compiled into an instruction Design Compiler at TSMC 28 nm HPC+ process node. Area sequence following the hardware constraints.
and power of the logic components are obtained from the The PIM and ASIC behaviors are modeled as state masynthesis results. The area and power of SRAM buffer are chines. The PIM hierarchy is organized as a tree structure extractedfromthe TSMC 28 nmdatasheetbasedon Synopsys at package, channel and bank levels. The PIM package node Memory Compiler. The ASIC only consumes a core area of refers to the entire PIM portion that contains 8 channels as 0.64 𝑚𝑚2, and the peak power is 304.59 𝑚𝑊 .
child nodes. Each channel consists of 16 banks as leaves. The state update will traverse down the tree from the root to Table 1. PIM-GPT Baseline Hardware Configuration.
the leaves. The same organization hierarchy can be found in other memory simulators, such as Ramulator [22].
Timing t RCD=12 ns, t RP=12 ns, t CCD=1 ns, The transition of states follows the timing constraints. At Constraint t WR=12 ns, t RFC=455 ns, t REFI=6825 ns everyclockcycle,thesimulatorchecksthestatusofthe ASIC and the PIM package. If both are in Idle state, the current IDD IDD 2 N=276 m A, IDD 3 N=262 m A, instruction is completely consumed. It then fetches the next IDD 0=366 m A, IDD 4 R=1590 m A, instruction, which will be decoded into command sequences.
IDD 4 W=1410 m A, IDD 5 B=831 m A The ASIC chip or the PIM chip will be put into Process state GDDR 6 Channel = 8, Banks/channel = 16, Capacafter the instruction is issued. The simulator will compute Specification ity/channel = 4 Gb, Row size = 2 KB, Colthetimenext_timethatthe ASIC orrelevant PIM bankswill umn number = 16 k, Frequency = 1 GH z, take to complete the triggered events based on the latency Pins = 16/channel, Data rate = 16 Gb/s/pin model.Thesimulatorkeepstrackofthestatusofallhardware PIM Buffer=2 KB/channel,MAC unit=1/bank, components. If the CLK reaches the next_time, the status of Frequency = 1 GH z, Power = 149.29 m W the corresponding node will be changed back to Idle.
Benchmark Analysis The performance and energy ef AISC Frequency = 1 GH z, SRAM = 128 KB, # of ficiency of the proposed PIM-GPT system are evaluated us Adders = 256, # of Multipliers = 128, Area ing the simulator and compared to GPU (NVIDIA T 4) and = 0.64 mm 2, Power = 304.59 m W CPU (Intel Xeon Gold 6154 with 16 Gb DDR 4). 4 GPT 2 [34] and 4 GPT 3 [2] models with up to 1.4 billion parameters For DRAM energy benchmark analysis, we synthesized are used for the single batch inference benchmark analysis.
the optimized floating point MAC units at 28 nm technol- DRAM energy is evaluated by multiplying the IDD values ogy, followed by scaling the voltage to 1.25 V to match the consumed during each command with the corresponding GDDR 6 supply voltage [27]. Since routing is more complex latency and VDD, following the standard procedure [30][11].
in DRAM due to the limited metal layers compared to CMOS DRAM refresh operations are also included. The energy conlogic process, we conservatively multiply the power by 1.5, sumed by the PIM MAC units and by the ASIC are computed 𝑚𝑊 which comes to 149.29 for 16 MAC units. As GDDR 6 by multiplying the latency reported by the simulator with can be fabricated in 1 ynm technology [27], the actual power the synthesized power consumption. The energy consumed consumption is expected to be lower than this estimate. Ta- through I/O is evaluated by the number of data transferred ble 1 lists the timing constraints and current values used to between the PIM chip and the ASIC chip.
model the PIM behavior for each command. For PIM related We select NVIDIA T 4 as the GPU benchmark as it also commands, the timing constraints are obtained from [27]. uses GDDR 6 as memory for a fair comparison. For GPU, For normal DRAM commands, we adopt GDDR 5 timing con- latency is recorded using torch.cuda.Event(), and power strains in [22] to make a conservative estimation due to the is measured with pynvml, which is a wrapper around the lack of detailed information of GDDR 6. Similarly, the current NVIDIA management library. For CPU characterization, we 8 Table 2. Comparison with Other GPT Accelerators.
Sp Atten Trans PIM DFX PIM- [39] [44] [18] GPT Memory HBM HBM HBM GDDR 6 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ End-toend Data INT INT FP 16 BF 16 Type Largest GPT 2- GPT 2- GPT 2- GPT 2/3 Figure 8. Speedup w.r.t GPU and CPU.
Model medium medium XL XL Speedup 35× 33× 3.2× 89× Energy - ∼250× 3.99× 221× Efficiency Notes: Speedup and energy efficiency are over GPU. PIM-GPT results are based on 1024 token generation.
want to highlight that the PIM-GPT testing result is based on 1024 tokens, which cannot be supported by these prior prototypes.
Energy Efficiency Figure 9 shows that the PIM-GPT achieves energy reduction of 123−383× and 320−602× over Figure 9. Energy efficiency w.r.t GPU and CPU.
GPU and CPU, respectively. PIM-GPT effectively eliminates the energy consumption of DRAM data transmission by ususe python package time.time() for latency measurement ing PIM to locally consume data. Additionally, the mapping and an open-source terminal tool s-tui for power monitor. method leverages data locality and minimizes the row ACT In each measurement, we generate 1024 tokens and repeat and PRE operations that are energy consuming. The ASIC 10 times to report average energy and latency values. only contributes a very small fraction of the total system energy, but provides highly efficient arithmetic computations.
5.2 Overall System Performance In comparison, DFX only achieves 3.99× higher energy Speedup Asshownin Figure 8,the PIM-GPT systemachieves efficiency compared to the GPU baseline [18]. Trans PIM remarkable performance improvements, 41−137× speedup reports ∼250× energy reduction [44]. Sp Atten reports 382× over GPU and 639−1074× speedup over CPU for the 8 GPT over GPU [39], but only the attention layer is included in models. The high speedup originates from three aspects: (1) energy estimate while others including FFN layers are not Memory bottleneck is effectively removed by performing the considered. Speedup and energy efficiency for the above memory-intensive VMM operations inside PIM channel; (2) mentioned accelerators are summarized in Table 2.
The mapping strategy maximizes computation parallelism 5.3 Detailed Performance Analysis and data locality; (3) Different workloads are efficiently distributed between PIM and ASIC. In comparison, GPU is not The layerwise latency breakdown of GPT 3-small and GPT 3 suitableforsequentialtokengeneration,sincethelargemem- XL in Figure 10 shows that VMM operations dominate the ory footprint and low data reuse rate under-utilize the GPU total execution time of PIM-GPT. All other arithmetic comcomputation resources [18]. putations only account for 1.16% of total latency in GPT 3-XL.
We also compare the PIM-GPT performance with previ- For larger Transformer models, the improvement of PIM ously reported Transformer accelerators, as shown in Table GPT over GPU is reduced. This is because larger GPT models 2. Sp Atten [39] accelerates GPT 2-medium by 35× over GPU, allow better utilization of GPU computation resources. As a and Trans PIM [44] obtains similar speedup of 33×. Both ig- result, the gain over GPU is reduced when compared with nore the layer normalization and residual connections in smaller GPT models, although the performance gain ( > 40×) Transformer models. DFX [18] provides 3.2× latency reduc- is still significant.
tion on average. PIM-GPT achieves state-of-the-art perfor- For PIM-GPT, the VMM computation occurs on the same mance with 89× speedup on average over GPU. We also DRAM chip that stores the required weights and Key, Value 9 Figure 10. Layer-wise latency breakdown of (a) GPT 3-small and (b) GPT 3-XL.
mactrices. Therefore, a significant amount of data movement Figure 12. DRAM energy consumption breakdown of all can be eliminated. The data movement only happens when models.
VMM results are transmitted to the ASIC for downstream processing or data synchronization. Figure 11(a) shows the If a data is access from the row buffer without activating data transfer reduction can be 110−259×. In PIM-GPT, data the bank row, such an access is a hit. The row hit rate is movement no longer becomes the bottleneck and consumes calculated by the number of hits over total data access. Figa very small proportion of the total latency, as illustrated by ure 13(a) plots the row hit rates, achieving ∼ 98% for the 8 the layerwise breakdown in Figure 10. We also evaluated the GPT models. The system performance is further enhanced reduction of energy consumption of DRAM I/O compared by increasing computation parallelism, as shown in Figure to GPU based on HBM 2 and GDDR 6 memory, which is com 13(b). More memory channels can be attached to the ASIC monly used in the state-of-the-art GPU s. The HBM 2 access with relatively minor modifications to the ASIC data port.
energy 3.9 p J/bit is adopted from [32]. PIM-GPT achieves The improvement scales almost linearly with the number 78−184× and 110−259× I/O energy reduction with respect of channels, proving the efficacy of parallelism-aware mapto HBM 2 and GDDR 6, as shown in Figure 11(b), proving the ping scheme in PIM-GPT. The speedup slightly reduces for effectiveness of PIM-GPT in eliminating external matrix data longer sequences, because longer sequences require more movement.
arithmetic computation on ASIC.
Figure 11. (a) Reduction of data movement. (b) Reduction Figure 13. (a) Row hit rate. (b) PIM channel scalability.
of DRAM I/O energy consumption.
5.4 Sensitivity Study Since weight matrices reside in DRAM, only the input and output vectors will be transferred though the I/O. Hence, the ASICF requency The PIM-GPTASIC isdesignedwith TSMC memory access complexity can be reduced from O(𝑛2) to 28 nm technology at 1 GH z clock frequency. However, fre O(𝑛).
As a result, the energy consumption through DRAM quency scaling is an important technique for power opti I/O in PIM-GPT is less then 10% of total DRAM energy con- mization. We conduct a sensitivity study of ASIC frequency sumption in PIM-GPT, as shown in DRAM energy consump- by varying the latency setting in our simulator. Figure 14 tion breakdown in Figure 12. MAC operation consumes most shows the latency at different clock frequencies for the 8 of the DRAM energy, since VMM is the core part of the GPT. GPT models, where the latency is normalized with respect Other DRAM operations, such as ACT, PRE and REF, along to the 1 GH z results. Overall there is only a small latency with the standby energy consumption consumes around 33% increase when the ASIC frequency scales down from 1 GH z of DRAM energy. to 200 MH z for all models. Even when further scaling the In PIM-GPT, data locality is optimized during model map- frequency down to 100 MH z, which is 10 times slower than ping to reduce the memory access time and enhance the the baseline, the worst case only incurs a performance slowcomputation throughput, which is evaluated by row hit rate. down of 20%. Moreover, larger models are less sensitive to 10