Optimizing Memory Efficiency for Convolution Kernels on Kepler GPU s Xiaoming Chen, Jianxu Chen, Danny Z. Chen, and Xiaobo Sharon Hu Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA {xchen 7, jchen 16, dchen, shu}@nd.edu ABSTRACT in various computer vision applications, such as image recognition [4], image classification [5], object detection [6], etc.
Convolution is a fundamental operation in many applica State-of-the-art CNN s typically have quite a few convolutions, such as computer vision, natural language processing, tional layers. Propagating through these convolutional layimage processing, etc. Recent successes of convolutional ers is always a computation bottleneck in both the training neural networks in various deep learning applications put and inference phases of CNN s.
even higher demand on fast convolution. The high com With the rapid development of many-core parallel proputation throughput and memory bandwidth of graphics cessors, new methods have been developed by leveraging processing units (GPU s) make GPU s a natural choice for high computation throughput and memory bandwidth of accelerating convolution operations. However, maximally graphics processing units (GPU s) to accelerate convolution exploiting the available memory bandwidth of GPU s for operations. These methods can be roughly classified into convolution is a challenging task. This paper introduces four categories: (1) general matrix multiplication (GEMM) a general model to address the mismatch between the membased convolution [7,8], (2) direct convolution [9–11], (3) fast ory bank width of GPU s and computation data width of Fourier transform (FFT) based convolution [12–14], and (4) threads. Based on this model, we develop two convolution the Winograd algorithm [15,16].
kernels, one for the general case and the other for a special Convolution can be easily converted into a multiplicacase with one input channel. By carefully optimizing memtion of two matrices by unrolling all the involved convoluory access patterns and computation patterns, we design tion operations [7]. Highly optimized GEMM kernels (e.g., a communication-optimized kernel for the special case and cu BLAS [17]) can be invoked to compute matrix multiplia communication-reduced kernel for the general case. Excations. This is the default method in Caffe [18], a popular perimental data based on implementations on Kepler GPU s deep learning framework. Although good performance can show that our kernels achieve 5.16× and 35.5% average perbe attained, it requires a huge amount of additional memformance improvement over the latest cu DNN library, for ory. Recently, cu DNN [8] adopted a GEMM-like method, the special case and the general case, respectively.
in which sub-blocks of the input matrices are constructed in CCS Concepts on-chip memory at run-time, and thus no additional memory is needed. A direct method was proposed in [9], but the re- •Computing methodologies → Massively parallel alported performance is not good enough when there are more gorithms; than 100 channels. In [10], optimization techniques were Keywords discussed for direct convolution on GPU s, but the proposed Convolution; graphics processing unit; memory bandwidth method was not compared with any public library. Cudaconvnet 2 [11] also implemented direct convolution on GPU s, 1. INTRODUCTION but there is no detailed document to describe its methodology or performance. FFT-based convolution [12–14] can re Convolution is a fundamental operation in many image duce the arithmetic complexity compared with direct methprocessing and computer vision applications. For example, ods. However, the filters need to be padded to the same size image convolution is a key component in numerous basic imas the input image, which incurs additional memory and age processing routines, such as edge detection [1], smoothcomputation time. In addition, in order to reuse the Fourier ing [1], template-based object detection [2], etc. Recently, transform of the filters, the batch size should be big enough.
convolutional neural networks (CNN s) [3] have become a Recent studies have shown that the Winograd algorithm can powerful deep learning model which has been widely adopted significantly reduce the arithmetic complexity for the 3×3 filter [15,16], at the cost of increased memory usage and Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or filter size dependent specialized processing.
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita- Although FFT-based methods and the Winograd algotion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than rithm can be faster than direct methods in some cases, they ACM mustbehonored. Abstractingwithcreditispermitted. Tocopyotherwise,orreare not universal. Direct convolution is still fundamental publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission and/orafee. Requestpermissionsfrompermissions@acm.org. and considered the best in general. In this paper, we aim DAC’17,June 18-22,2017,Austin,TX,USA to improve the memory efficiency of direct convolution on GPU s, targeting at two cases: (1) a special case with one (cid:13)c 2017 ACM.ISBN 978-1-4503-4927-7/17/06...$15.00 DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3061639.3062297 7102 ya M 92 ]CD.sc[ 1 v 19501.5071:vi Xra 1000 input channel, which appears in numerous image processing 800 applications and the input layer of CNN s (for grayscale im- 600 400 ages), and (2) the general case for CNN s. Specifically, we 200 introduce a general model to address the mismatch between 0 2 K 3 K 4 K 5 K 6 K 7 K 8 K the shared memory bank width of GPU s and computation data width of threads. Based on this model, by carefully optimizing the memory access patterns and computation patterns, we design a communication-optimized kernel for the special case and a communication-reduced kernel for the general case. Experimental data based on implementations on Kepler GPU s show that our convolution kernels achieve 5.16× and 35.5% average performance improvement compared with the latest cu DNN library, for the special case and the general case, respectively.
2. PROBLEM FORMULATION In this section, we present the problem formulation, which illustrates the main challenges and the general model that we propose to overcome such challenges.
2.1 GPU Memory Constraints and Modeling Most GPU programs are memory bandwidth hungry. GPU s usually have a complex memory hierarchy subject to different constraints. Global memory (GM) accesses should be coalesced in order to reduce latency. Bank conflict should be avoided when accessing the shared memory (SM). For the constant memory (CM), all the access addresses within one warp should be identical to take full advantage of the broadcast mechanism. These are basic constraints that GPU programs should satisfy to achieve good performance.
The SM bank width, which also plays an important role in GPU performance, however, has received less attention from programmers and researchers. We elaborate this problem below. Let W be the SM bank width. (W is 8 (bytes) SMB SMB on Kepler and 4 on other GPU architectures.) Further, let W be the computation data width for each thread. For CD example, if each thread takes float as the minimum unit fort computation, then W = 4. The relation between CD W and W can be described by SMB CD W = n · W . (1) SMB CD If n = 1, the SM bank width and computation data width are matched; otherwise, they are unmatched. Mismatch between W and W frequently occurs in practice. Even SMB CD when W is 4, W can be 2 (for short or fp 16) or 1 (for SMB CD char). Fig. 1 illustrates the impact of a mismatch. Consider multiple threads reading from or writing to the SM. A conventional method shown in Fig. 1 a is often used, where contiguous threads access contiguous elements, as it is easy to program. But, such a method may fail to fully utilize the available SM bandwidth. For example, if n = 2, as shown in Fig. 1 a, any two accesses that fall into the same bank have to be serialized. Yet, if we can double the computation Element in shared memory (size W ) Thread CD (a) (b) Bank Bank Bank Bank Bank Bank Bank Bank 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 Figure 1: Different SM access patterns. (a) Conventional approach. (b) Matched approach.
noitucex E )sm( emit cu BLAS MAGMA MAGMA mod.
Matrix dimension Figure 2: Execution time comparison for the single-precision GEMM on a Kepler K 40 m GPU.
Channel 0 + + Channel C-1 ...
Output feature map 0 K Reused pixels Output feature map F-1 (a) (b) Figure 3: Basics of convolution. (a) A general convolution operation in CNN (C is the # of channels, K is the filter size, and F is the # of filters). (b) Data reuse in convolution (the solid circles mark pixels that are being used for convolution).
data width through intelligent thread layout and computation pattern redesign so that W = W , as in Fig. 1 b, SMB CD then each thread can obtain 2 elements together in a single access, resulting in a 2× improvement in the SM bandwidth.
To demonstrate the importance of this problem, we compare the performance of the single-precision GEMM on a Kepler K 40 m GPU, as shown in Fig. 2. MAGMA is highly optimized for Fermi and is faster than cu BLAS on the Fermi architecture [19]; however, it becomes 2.4× slower than cu BLAS on the Kepler architecture. The SM bank width of the Kepler architecture is twice of that of Fermi, causing a mismatch between W and W for the MAGMA kernel that CD SMB operates on float, which results in the loss of half of the SM bandwidth. Yet, a modification to the MAGMA kernel by matching W with W saves 36% of the execution time CD SMB on average.
Consequently, for applications that are sensitive to the SM bandwidth, memory access patterns and computation patterns should be reorganized to match W with W .
CD SMB That is, each thread should be designed such that it accesses and computes n basic elements as a single unit. In this way, we can obtain an n× improvement in the SM bandwidth.
2.2 Data Sharing in Convolution One key aspect in developing highly efficient convolution operations on GPU s is to maximize data sharing, which is also a key factor for communication reduction. Consider the general case of convolution in CNN s (see Fig. 3 a). Fig. 3 b illustrates a simple data reuse method, in which pixels can be reused in both the horizontal and vertical directions as indicated by the solid circles within the dashed boxes. A simple analysis shows that an input pixel can be used up to K×K×F times, where K is the filter size and F is the number of filters. This feature should be fully exploited to reduce both GM and SM accesses. For this aim, elaborate memory access patterns and computation patterns need to be used, while still satisfying the basic constraints of the GPU memory hierarchy.
Another challenge arises from the SM bank width model presented in the previous subsection. As convolution is SM bandwidth bounded, when designing convolution kernels on GPU s, we must strive to match W and W , in order CD SMB to fully utilize the SM bandwidth.
W H Pixels required for block Figure 4: Image partitioning.
...
Thread 0 Thread 1 Thread 2 ...
Block ...
...
Block (a) ...
Thread 0 Thread 1 Thread 2 ...
Block ...
...
illustrated in Fig. 5 a. Once a row is finished, the W threads move down to compute the next row. Thus we read a new row from the input image for each down movement. This process continues until reaching the bottom of the block.
3.2 Optimizing Memory Accesses We now discuss how we schedule memory accesses in coordination with the thread layout design in Section 3.1. Since the filters in the special case (with only 1 input channel) are typically small, they can reside in the CM and no further scheduling is needed. We focus our discussion on accessing 2 convolutions the input image in the GM to minimize GM communication.
We first consider the simple case of W = W . For CD SMB each row of the block, we first read it into the SM (including the needed pixels outside the block boundaries), and then the W threads read their corresponding pixels into re Block spective registers. This process allows horizontal data shar- (b) ing and avoids redundant reads from the GM as adjacent Figure 5: Our convolution method for the special case (K = threads share some common pixels. Hence, our 2 D data 3 in this example). (a) For matched W and W . (b) CD SMB sharing method works as follows: in the horizontal direc For unmatched W and W (n = 2 in this illustration).
CD SMB tion, the SM provides inter-thread data sharing; in the vertical direction, intra-thread data sharing is achieved through Taking all these requirements into consideration, the goal the private registers of the threads.
of this paper is to develop general solutions for convolution A simple analysis shows that each pixel in a block is read on GPU s, such that (i) the memory communication is refrom the GM only once, which is, of course, the theoretduced as much as possible, (ii) the basic constraints of the ical lower bound. For the entire image, only those pixels GPU memory hierarchy are satisfied, and (iii) the SM bank which are needed by a block and outside the block boundwidth and the computation data width are matched.
aries are read more than once. But, the proportion of such halo pixels is small. As a result, this method is (almost) 3. CONVOLUTION FOR SPECIAL CASE communication-optimal for GM accesses.
When considering the SM bank width model presented This section presents our convolution kernel for the spein Section 2.1, the above thread layout and memory access cial case, in which the input has only one channel (C = 1 schedule are suitable only when n = 1, i.e., W = W .
in Fig. 3 a). This case arises at the first layer of CNN s (for CD SMB On the Kepler architecture, n = 2 if we use float as the grayscale images) and in many image processing applicabasic computation unit. Following the general idea depicted tions. We first show how we design the thread layout and in Fig. 1 b, we propose to have each thread read, write, and then discuss how we achieve optimal memory accesses.
compute n pixels together (using built-in data types such as 3.1 Thread Layout float 2 or float 4). Each thread is responsible for n contiguous output pixels in each row and n×H output pixels The goal of thread layout is to judiciously allocate comin the block (for one output feature map). The number of putation to thread blocks (TB s) and individual threads to threads in a TB is reduced to W . With this approach, each maximize both coarse-grained and fine-grained parallelism.
n thread needs a few more registers (O(K×(n−1))) to store Fig. 3 b depicts the general concept for our parallelization K×(K+n−1) pixels that are used by the convolutions for n methodology, in which each thread keeps K×K pixels of the contiguous output pixels. Fig. 5 b shows our modified coninput image used by a convolution operation in the register.
volution method specifically for the Kepler architecture.
However, directly applying this method would cause a problem. A thread cannot move right and down simultaneously.
3.3 Implementation In other words, once a thread moves to the right to compute the next convolution, it loses some pixels needed by the con- Algorithm 1 outlines the flow of our special case convoluvolution below. One could use additional registers to store tion method at the TB level. The algorithm starts by readsuch lost pixels, but a lot more registers would be required. ing K image rows of the block into the SM (line 1). After To resolve this issue, we propose an alternative scheme to that, the first K−1 rows are read into the threads’ regismaximize both parallelism and 2 D data sharing. ters (line 3). Then convolution is performed on all the rows To achieve coarse-grained parallelism, we partition the in- within the block iteratively in a loop (lines 4-11). For each put image into blocks of size H×W each (see Fig. 4). Such row, the data are first read from the SM into the threads’ partitioning enables data sharing along the vertical direc- registers (line 6), and then each thread computes convolution, since one row of the input image can be used by the tions for all the filters (lines 7 and 8). We use a prefetchconvolutions of K rows. A TB with W threads handles one ing mechanism to overlap computations and GM accesses.
image block. Different image blocks are assigned to differ- Before the threads’ computation tasks, the next image row ent TB s so that they are computed in parallel. Each block of the block is prefetched into the threads’ registers (line needs some additional pixels outside its right and bottom 5). Although this operation may take a long time, it can boundaries to compute convolutions. be overlapped with convolution computations, since they In terms of fine-grained parallelism, all the W threads have no data dependency. After prefetching is finished, the in a TB compute convolutions of one row in parallel, as prefetched data are written into the SM (line 10).
Algorithm 1: Convolution for the special case on GPU s.
1 Load rows 0 to K−1 (the first K rows) of the block into the SM; 2 __syncthreads(); 3 Each thread loads (K−1)×(K+n−1) pixels from the SM into register; 4 for k=K−1; k<H+K−1;++k do 5 Prefetch row k+1 of the block into register; 6 Each thread loads the latest row from the SM into register; 7 for f=0; f<F;++f do 8 Each thread computes n convolutions for filter f and writes the results back to the GM; 9 __syncthreads(); 10 Store the prefetched row into the SM; 11 __syncthreads(); The above algorithm is quite memory efficient. When computing convolutions, the involved pixels are in registers so the latency can be ignored. The filters are fetched from the CM. In our method, all the threads within a warp always compute convolutions using the same filter at the same time, so they always access the identical address, which is the best case for the CM. As the filters are quite small in the special case, a high hit rate of the constant cache can be expected. When accessing the SM and GM, contiguous threads always read or write contiguous addresses (at the granularity of n pixels as a single unit), so both coalesced GM access and conflict-free SM access are achieved. Our experimental results in Section 5 support our analysis here.
4. CONVOLUTION FOR GENERAL CASE This section presents our convolution kernel for the general case, where the input has multiple channels (see Fig. 3 a).
Note that the method for the special case cannot be applied here for the following reasons. For the special case, we can keep the needed pixels in the threads’ registers since the filters are small. Thus, we can finish one convolution at once with K×K fused multiply-add (FMA) operations. With multiple channels, the involved pixels of one convolution cannot entirely reside in the registers. Hence, the computation of one convolution must be divided into multiple steps, and the intermediate results should be accumulated in the registers. In addition, the filters (proportional to the number of channels) become larger and may no longer fit in the CM.
Instead, the GM needs to store both the filters and the input image. Our basic idea for the general case is inspired by the blocked GEMM method for GPU s [19], but we optimize memory communication by maximally sharing data.
4.1 Thread Layout Similar to the special case, each input channel of the input image is partitioned into blocks of size H ×W each (see Fig. 4). We use a 2 D TB layout which is similar to that adopted by the blocked GEMM method [19]. Since in the general case, a TB cannot be responsible for all the filters, we divide the computation into a 2 D TB layout of size TB ×TB . In the X dimension, a TB is responsible for X Y F contiguous filters, where TB = (cid:100)F/F (cid:101). In the Y TB X TB dimension, a TB is responsible for C image blocks at the same location of all the C channels. Within a TB, we use a 2 D thread layout of size T ×T . Each thread is respon X Y sible for W output pixels and F filters, where T = F TB T T X F T and T = W×H. Each thread keeps F ×W pixels in the Y T T W T register to store the intermediate convolution results for the ...
Thread 1 (Y) W+K-1 C channels of image SH blocks in shared memory H+K-1 Thread 0 (Y) ...
W T W +K-1 T ...
Thread 1 (X) F TB C channels of filters SH in shared memory K*K Thread 0 (X) ... ...
... ...
F *W T T pixels in register in register FT filter values Padding Storage order W +K-1 pixels T in register * * Storage order ...
Shared memory Register 1 st round 2 nd round Figure 6: Our convolution method for the general case (n=2 in this illustration).
W pixels and F filters. In the following subsections, our T T discussion will focus on optimizing memory access patterns to reduce memory communication.
4.2 Optimizing Memory Accesses Fig. 6 depicts our convolution method for the general case at the TB level. To improve the GM efficiency, we store C SH channels of image blocks (including the needed halo pixels outside the block) and the filters in the SM (shown as the two blue boxes in Fig. 6). When reading filter values from the GM to the SM, since the block is transposed, padding (the gray box in Fig. 6) is required for the SM to avoid bank conflict. For the image blocks, pixels are directly read into the SM without transposition, so padding is not needed.
To increase data sharing within a thread, the W out T put pixels computed by one thread are contiguous along the horizontal direction. This is a major difference from the blocked GEMM method [19] where contiguous output pixels are computed by contiguous threads. Computing W contiguous output pixels by one thread involves read T ing (W +K−1) ×K×C pixels from the SM, instead of T W ×K×K×C if they are computed by different threads. As T C may be large, it is impossible to put all of these involved pixels in the register. So we only keep a row of W +K−1 T input pixels in each thread’s register, and the convolution results are accumulated iteratively. The W +K−1 input T pixels are used in K rounds of computation of W output T pixels. A round of computation refers to an FMA operation in a convolution.
When reading filter values from the SM, we use the same thread layout as that used in the blocked GEMM method [19].
However, in order to meet the requirement of the SM bank width model, each thread should read n contiguous values as a single unit along the horizontal direction, as illustrated in Fig. 6 (the upper blue box). This method is conflict-free as contiguous threads in the X dimension read contiguous units from the SM.
Our thread layout and memory access patterns also avoid bank conflict when accessing the SM for image blocks. As the X dimension of the 2 D thread layout is assigned along the feature direction, T contiguous threads in the X dimen X sion access the identical address of the SM for image blocks, which benefits from the broadcast mechanism of the SM.
The only issue of this approach is at the writing back Algorithm 2: Convolution for the general case on GPU s. 100 80 1 Register: r Acc[F T ][W T ], r Img[W T +K−1], r Flt[F T ]; 60 2 Shared memory: sh Img[C SH ][H+K−1][W+K−1], 40 20 sh Flt[C ][K ×K][F +padding]; SH TB 0 3 Clear r Acc; 4 Load C SH channels of image blocks into sh Img; 5 Load C SH channels of filters into sh Flt; 6 __syncthreads(); 7 for c=0; c<C; c+=C SH do 8 Prefetch next C SH channels of image blocks into register; 9 Prefetch next C SH channels of filters into register; 10 for i=0; i<C SH ;++i do 11 for j=0; j<K;++j do 12 Each thread loads W T +K−1 pixels into r Img; 13 for k=0; k<K;++k do 14 Each thread loads F T filter values into r Flt; 15 r Acc[0,··· ,F T −1][0,··· ,W T −1]+ = r Flt[0,··· ,F −1]×r Img[k,··· ,W +k−1]; T T 16 __syncthreads(); 17 Store prefetched image blocks into sh Img; 18 Store prefetched filters into sh Flt; 19 __syncthreads(); 20 Write r Acc back to the GM; phase. Writing the results back to the GM is not coalesced, as contiguous threads in the X dimension compute different output feature maps. However, we have found that in the general case convolution, the writing back phase consumes very little time, so we do not optimize the uncoalesced writing back operations. If one wants to make the writing back coalesced, the SM can be used as a buffer to reorganize the data layout. However, this would lead to additional cost including the SM latency and TB barriers.
4.3 Implementation Algorithm 2 outlines our general case convolution method at the TB level. The algorithm starts by clearing the results (line 3) and loading the first C channels of image blocks SH and filters into the SM (lines 4 and 5). After that, a loop iteratively accumulates the results for all the channels (lines 7–19). For each channel, a thread needs to conduct K rows of computations (lines 11–15), and for each row, K rounds of computation are conducted (lines 13–15). The image data are loaded into each thread’s register only for each row (line 12), and these data are used by K rounds of computation.
The filter data are loaded into the register in each round (line 14). We also use a prefetching method to overlap GM accesses and computation (lines 8, 9, 17 and 18). After the intermediate results of all the channels are accumulated, the final results are written back to the GM (line 20).
Fig. 6 illustrates the first two rounds of computation for thread (0,0). The thread first loads a row of W +K−1 pixels T from the SM into the register. In the first round, it loads F T filter values from the first row of the SM storing the filters, and then updates the intermediate results by multiplying the F filter values and the first W pixels (the green dashed T T lines). In the second round, the F filter values are loaded T from the second row of the SM, but the pixels are not loaded again, as they are already in the row of W +K−1 pixels T with an offset (the purple dashed lines).
Compared with direct GEMM-based convolution methods, our method reduces GM communication by approximately 1 , since one image row is used by the convolution of K K rows. The SM communication for fetching image pixels is reduced by W T +K−1.
W ·K T s/pol FG cu DNN Our kernel 800 600 400 200 0 s/pol FG cu DNN Our kernel Unmatched kernel 1200 900 600 300 0 s/pol FG (a) (b) cu DNN Our kernel (c) Figure 7: Performance of the special case convolution for different convolution parameters (N,K,F). (a) 1×1 filter.
(b) 3×3 filter. (c) 5×5 filter.
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS We have implemented our proposed methods and conducted experiments on a Kepler K 40 m GPU with peak performance of 4290 giga floating-point operations per second (GF lop/s) for single-precision. Our code is compiled with compute capability 3.5. As we aim at direct convolution, we compare our kernels with the GEMM-based convolution provided by cu DNN [8] (version 5.1).
5.1 Results of Special Case Through design space exploration, we determined that the best block size for the special case convolution kernel is W =256 and H =8. The performance comparison between our kernel and cu DNN for different convolution parameters (image size N, filter size K, and number of filters F) is shown in Fig. 7. For the 1×1 filter, actually there is no data sharing; however, our kernel still obtains an average 6.16× performance gain, due to the well-designed communicationoptimal kernel. For the 3×3 and 5×5 filters, our kernel obtains 6.43× and 2.90× average performance gains over cu DNN, respectively. The average performance gain of the three filters we have tested is 5.16×. The performance is lower when F =1, due to the low overlap between communication and computation, as the computation workload is quite low for F =1. However, our kernel can be more than 10× faster than cu DNN when F =1.
For the 3×3 filter, we have also implemented another kernel in which W and W are unmatched, i.e., the basic CD SMB unit for computation is float. As seen from Fig. 7 b, the performance is reduced by 19% if W and W are un CD SMB matched. It can be expected that the performance degradation will be higher for the general case if W and W CD SMB are unmatched, as the SM is used to store both the input image and the filters in the general case. If we compare the unmatched kernel with cu DNN, even if W and W are CD SMB unmatched, our parallelization strategy is still much better than cu DNN for the special case.
5.2 Results of General Case Table 1: Best configurations of our general case convolution kernel for different filter sizes for Kepler K 40 m.
Filter size 3×3 5×5 7×7 W 32 32 64 H 4 8 4 F 64 32 32 TB W 16 8 8 T F 4 8 8 T C 2 1 1 SH 2000 1500 1000 500 0 s/pol FG cu DNN Our kernel 2000 1500 1000 500 0 s/pol FG (a) 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 0 (c) cu DNN Our kernel s/pol FG 16- or 8-bit fixed-points, to reduce both the storage requirement and execution time. For these data types, mismatch between the SM bank width and the computation data width exists even for architectures with 4-byte SM bank width. As a result, our proposed model and method will benefit applications using these data types.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thisprojectwassupportedbythe National Science Foundation under grants 1640081, 1217906, 1629914 and 1617735, and the Nanoelectronics Research Corporation (NERC), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), through Extremely Energy Efficient Collective Electronics (EXCEL),an SRC-NRIN anoelectronics Research Initiativeunder Research Task ID s 2698.004 and 2698.005.
8. REFERENCES [1] Rafael C Gonzalez and Richard E Woods. Digital Image (b) cu DNN Our kernel Processing. Pearson, 3 rd edition, 2007.
[2] S. Chaudhuri, S. Chatterjee, N. Katz, M. Nelson, and M. Goldbaum. Detection of Blood Vessels in Retinal Images Using Two-dimensional Matched Filters. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 8(3):263–269, 1989.
[3] Y. Le Cun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel. Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition. Neural Comput., 1(4):541–551, 1989.
[4] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition.
Co RR, abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[5] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Imagenet Classification with Deep convolutional Neural Networks. In NIPS, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[6] Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich Feature Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation. In CVPR, pages 580–587, 2014.
[7] Kumar Chellapilla, Sidd Puri, and Patrice Simard. High Figure 8: Performance of the general case convolution for Performance Convolutional Neural Networks for Document Processing. In ICFHR, 2006.
different convolution parameters (N,K,C,F). (a) 3×3 fil- [8] Sharan Chetlur, Cliff Woolley, Philippe Vandermersch, ter. (b) 5×5 filter. (c) 7×7 filter.
Jonathan Cohen, John Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan Shelhamer. cu DNN: Efficient Primitives for Deep Learning.
Table 1 lists the best configurations of our general case Co RR, abs/1410.0759, 2014.
[9] S. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Xiang, and L. Shi. Fast Convolution convolution kernel for different filter sizes for the Kepler Operations on Many-Core Architectures. In HPCC, pages K 40 m GPU. The performance comparison between our ker 316–323, 2015.
nel and cu DNN for different convolution parameters (image [10] Ben Van Werkhoven, Jason Maassen, Henri E. Bal, and size N, filter size K, number of channels C, and number Frank J. Seinstra. Optimizing Convolution Operations on GPU s Using Adaptive Tiling. Future Gener. Comput. Syst., of filters F) is shown in Fig. 8. For the three filter sizes 30:14–26, 2014.
we tested, we get 30.5%, 45.3%, and 30.8% average im- [11] cuda-convnet 2. Url: provements over cu DNN. Only when the image is very small https://code.google.com/archive/p/cuda-convnet 2/.
(32×32), our kernel may be a little slower than cu DNN. In all [12] Micha¨el Mathieu, Mikael Henaff, and Yann Le Cun. Fast Training of Convolutional Networks through FFT s. Co RR, the other cases, our kernel is always faster than cu DNN. The abs/1312.5851, 2013.
average performance improvement of the three filter sizes is [13] Nicolas Vasilache, Jeff Johnson, Micha¨el Mathieu, Soumith 35.5%. The highest performance we have achieved is 2020 Chintala, Serkan Piantino, and Yann Le Cun. Fast Convolutional Nets With fbfft: A GPU Performance GF lop/s, which is 47% of the hardware peak performance.
Evaluation. Co RR, abs/1412.7580, 2014.
[14] Tyler Highlander and Andres Rodriguez. Very Efficient 6. CONCLUSIONS Training of Convolutional Neural Networks using Fast Fourier Transform and Overlap-and-Add. Co RR, abs/1601.06815, 2016.
In this paper, we introduced a general model to address [15] Andrew Lavin and Scott Gray. Fast Algorithms for Convoluthe mismatch between the SM bank width and computation tional Neural Networks. In CVPR, pages 4013–4021, 2016.
[16] Hyunsun Park, Dongyoung Kim, Junwhan Ahn, and Sungjoo data width of threads. Based on this model, we designed Yoo. Zero and Data Reuse-aware Fast Convolution for Deep and optimized two convolution kernels on GPU s. By care Neural Networks on GPU. In CODES, pages 33:1–33:10, 2016.
fully optimizing the thread layout and memory access pat- [17] cu BLAS. Url: http://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cublas/.
terns, we attained 5.16× and 35.5% average performance [18] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long, Ross B. Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and improvements over the latest cu DNN library, for the special Trevor Darrell. Caffe: Convolutional Architecture for Fast case and the general case, respectively.
Feature Embedding. Co RR, abs/1408.5093, 2014.
Although we have only implemented our convolution ker- [19] Rajib Nath, Stanimire Tomov, and Jack Dongarra. An nels on the Kepler architecture, our proposed ideas can be Improved MAGMA Gemm For Fermi Graphics Processing Units. Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl., 24(4):511–515, applied to other applications and architectures. For exam 2010.
ple, one of the recent development trends of CNN s is to use shorter data types, such as half-precision floating-points and