R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 7 Application of AI in Nutrition Ritu Ramakrishnan, Tianxiang Xing, Tianfeng Chen, Ming-Hao Lee, Jinzhu Gao also track the user’s progress to ensure that the advice is Abstract— In healthcare, artificial intelligence (AI) has been effective for their lifestyle.
changing the way doctors and health experts take care of people.
In current society, everyone has poor dietary habits, which This paper will cover how AI is making major changes in the lack nutritional benefits. According to the recent results of the health care system, especially with nutrition. Various machine WHO (World Health Organization), approximately 41 million learning and deep learning algorithms have been developed to people die due to non-communicable diseases in their body extract valuable information from healthcare data which help [1]. Nutrition could play a role in helping those with such doctors, nutritionists, and health experts to make better ailments. To do so with the current technology available we decisions and make our lifestyle healthy. This paper provides an are proposing a recommendation system for their day-to-day overview of the current state of AI applications in healthcare with a focus on the utilization of AI-driven recommender lifestyle.
systems in nutrition. It will discuss the positive outcomes and The goal of this research paper is to study AI applications challenges that arise when AI is used in this field. This paper in nutrition and address the challenges in making nutrition addresses the challenges to develop AI recommender systems in recommendations to common people. Looking at the future healthcare, providing a well-rounded perspective on the directions will give a better understanding of how AI is complexities. Real-world examples and research findings are changing healthcare. This paper aims to set more groundwork presented to underscore the tangible and significant impact AI for exploring technology with medicine.
recommender systems have in the field of healthcare, particularly in nutrition. The ongoing efforts of applying AI in .
nutrition lay the groundwork for a future where personalized recommendations play a pivotal role in guiding individuals toward healthier lifestyles. II. RELATED WORK Prompt Engineering Recent developments in nutrition Index Terms— Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, recommendation systems have seen various innovative Vectorization, Recipe Recommendation Systems, Nutrition approaches, reflecting the growing interest and advancements recommendations, Nutrition, Health care, recommendation in this area. Here are some notable examples: system, Natural language Processing.
A. Nutrional Plans Recommender: A Decision Tree Model I. INTRODUCTION Based on the user input information the model proposes a nutritional plan to the users [2].
A pplications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in nutrition are • Key Features: This model uses the decision tree growing rapidly and will grow even bigger in the upcoming technique to recommend the nutritional approach. The decade. AI needs a large amount of data to make decisions and BMI and BMR are calculated with the information predictions. It evolves with learning, reasoning, adapting, and provided by the user. Follow ups with the patient check problem-solving. AI has been used in specialized systems to whether the recommendations have improvements in develop evidence-based nutrition information from larger the patient’s lifestyle.
databases and provide best practices. It can give someone quick answers to complex nutrition problems and personalize • Decision Tree Modelling: The decision tree model uses nutrition according to lifestyles. The integration of AI the scikit-learn tool to evaluate the accuracy of the tree.
technologies, such as machine learning, deep learning, and • Dataset: The project gets the data from the users and natural language processing, has emerged as a powerful force stores information in the database. The BMI, BMR and in helping satisfy the nutritional needs of the people. It also macro nutrient for the users are calculated.
helps to detect early signs of disease, optimize treatment plans, and improve the overall patient experience. AI provides a B. Nutrition Deficiency Using Random Forest Model [3] detailed examination of their body using the applications.
• Key Features: The model uses the forest tree to subset AI applications have already been developed to help the the classification of disease and predict food diseases.
public to make healthier food choices. For example, various • Random Forest Model: The model is trained using the mobile applications have been created using AI algorithms to random forest, decision tree and KNN. When curving, study eating habits and provide meal plan recommendations based on their preference for their profile. These applications Ritu Ramakrishnan, Tianxiang Xing, Tianfeng Chen, and Ming Hao Lee are .
equal contribution to the paper. Jinzhu Gao is corresponding author (jgao@pacific.edu). All the authors work with department School of Engineering and Computer Science, University of The Pacific, California, USA.
8 R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 the validation random forest model has higher interactions, intent extraction, and dynamic data retrieval for accuracy and recall rate. personalized dietary recommendations. The main components of the nutrition chatbot application are shown in Figure 2.
• Dataset: The food dataset stores the food type, minerals, grams and food disease in different columns.
The model predicts the disease with three other columns.
C. Health status improvement using dietary standards For patients who suffer from obesity, type II diabetes and hypertension are measured and compared with the changes in their bodies. The patients were divided into three groups with no guidance, guided by a dietitian and guided by a dietitian and a physician. It was found that diet has a significant impact on patient weight and blood pressure observed in the graphs of the guided groups [4].
D. Seasonal variation and Food recommendation Seasonal change can impact the food recommendations, Fig. 2. Nutritional Diet Chatbot the price and availability of the foods. For example, tomatoes, eggplant and cucumber are seasonal and are consumed more 1) User Interaction and Intent Extraction in the summer and autumn. Therefore, the seasonal change The user provides information about their dietary would affect the intake of nutrition in people’s diet [5].
preferences, restrictions, and health goals through natural language interaction. The information is collected to The food recommendation system supports a healthy diet provide personalized recommendations. These inputs and based on the user input and their eating habits. There are dietary quires are passed into the dietary model. The various websites that get user input and classify them as intent of the user is then extracted based on the healthy or non-healthy. They then suggest the healthiest diet information available.
according to their lifestyle and to follow up with the user by asking them to upload the picture of the meal [6].
2) Dynamic data retrieval After the intent extraction, the model dynamically E. BMI standard calculations retrieves relevant data from the model. The intents are The nutritional research was conducted in China to check cross-referenced with the available data services. The the health and dietary requirements of the people. Having a data services consist of different datasets including BMI > 30 implies a weight problem according to the WHO nutritional information, recipe databases, and userbut it is different depending on the countries, and it has larger specific profile information. This will also ensure whether variations depending upon the specific places [7]. the relevant data is extracted for the recommendation.
3) Dietary recommendation response III. METHODOLOGY The specific dietary suggestions generated by the We developed a nutritional AI application that helps our application are based on the user's input and dietary type.
daily day-to-day lifestyle. It is like a personal assistant that These recommendations aim to align with the user's helps you achieve your health goals by suggesting nutritional preferences, offering a range of meal ideas that cater to meal plans, exercises, and supplements. The main goal is to their specified diet. The user input is processed for create a smart nutrition application that uses AI to provide improving the model.
personalized recommendations. To achieve the goal, we use a B. Exercise Recommender structured approach of data collection, model development, and validation. The workflow of the recommendations system The exercise recommender system is a hybrid system is shown in Figure 1. which uses the content-based technique or collaborative technique [8] to recommend the workout routines. The workout routines are crafted based on their user profile and individual fitness goals. The workflow of the nutrition recommender system is shown in Figure 3.
Fig. 1. AI nutrition Application The system starts with collecting the user information like their height, weight, and health history. A trained model will then use the information to recommend healthy meals, exercise, and nutritional supplements. The following subsections will deep-dive into the specific features of this nutritional application that could benefit the users.
A. Nutritional Diet Chatbot Fig. 3. Nutrition Recommendation System The methodological approach of integrating an NLP driven model into a nutritional chatbot focuses on user 1) Understanding Fitness Goals: R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 9 The nutrition application collects the user journey by dietary preferences, health conditions, and past understanding fitness goals, Body Mass Index (BMI), interactions with nutritionists. The model then suggests age, and overall well-being. Through user interactions, nutritionists whose expertise aligns closely with the individuals share their exercise preferences, past fitness user's needs.
experiences, and any specific health considerations for 3) Tailored Nutritionist Recommendations: personalized recommendations.
The Recommender suggests a list of nutritionists that 2) Machine Learning and Hybrid Intelligence: aligns with the user profile. These professionals are The AI algorithm processes datasets, user inputs, and chosen based on their expertise in addressing specific combines individual preferences, workout histories, and health concerns, dietary preferences, and positive ratings adapts to evolving fitness objectives. After that, it from other users with similar wellness goals.
recommends the exercise routine for the user.
4) Locating Nearby Nutritionists with Best Ratings: 3) Adaptability, Progress Tracking: To ensure convenience and quality, the system This module is designed to highlight the user's identifies nearby nutritionists with the best ratings. By achievements. By continuously assessing performance, it considering user reviews and ratings, the Recommender refines routines, ensuring each workout remains directs individuals to the nutritionists.
challenging for its capabilities. It also suggests exercises E. Model Training with the option of a quick at-home workout or a comprehensive gym session. The Nutrition model gives personalized recommendations based on user inputs and dietary preferences. This method C. Nutritional Supplement Recommender ensures that the application considers individual needs, The Nutritional Supplement Recommender aims to guide provides accurate dietary suggestions, and contributes to a individuals toward the right nutritional supplements available healthier lifestyle.
in nearby stores, ensuring the integration of technology and 1) Data Collection and Preprocessing: well-being. The nutrition Supplement Recommender model as Various data on user inputs, including dietary similar is shown in Figure 3.
preferences, health goals, restrictions, and historical 1) User input: information for a personalized experience are gathered.
Users share information about their dietary The collected data is then cleaned, and standardization preferences, health goals, and any specific requirements processes are used to remove inconsistencies and ensure gathered from their profile, which will be used to suggest uniformity in the dataset. The missing values are the supplements. identified in the dataset.
2) Machine Learning Recommendation Model: 2) Feature Engineering: The machine learning model processes enormous Features such as nutritional requirements, dietary amounts of data to learn patterns and make informed restrictions, and taste preferences are carefully gathered suggestions. It considers preferences, health history, and to create a personalized user profile.
adapts to changes in the wellness journey over time.
3) Algorithm Selection: 3) Supplement Recommendations: A hybrid approach that uses both machine learning The recommender model gives the personalized (such as collaborative filtering) and deep learning supplement suggestion based on the user profile. (neural networks) is chosen to increase the strengths of Recommendations of vitamins, minerals, or specific each, enhancing recommendation accuracy.
dietary supplements are finely tuned to meet the user's Reinforcement learning elements are also integrated to individual health objectives. allow the model to adapt and refine recommendations based on user feedback and changing preferences.
4) Locating Nearby Stores: To improve the user experience, the system shows 4) User-Item Interaction Modeling: nearby stores that carry the recommended supplements. The model dynamically updates user profiles, This ensures accessibility and ease of purchase. capturing real-time interactions and adjustments in dietary habits to provide personalized recommendations D. Nutritionist Recommender that change with the user.
The Nutritionist Recommender takes a personalized turn 5) Training Iterations: by integrating content-based recommendations through a The model undergoes both batch and online training machine-learning model. This system aims to guide iterations, allowing it to learn from historical data and individuals to nearby nutritionists with top ratings, ensuring adapt in real time to changing user inputs and expert guidance aligned with the personal health of the users.
preferences.
The nutritionist recommender model as similar is shown in The validation metrics including precision, recall, Figure 3.
and F 1 score, are employed to assess the model's 1) Understanding User Profile: performance, ensuring that recommendations align with Users share information about their dietary dietary guidelines and user expectations.
preferences, health challenges, and specific goals they 6) Fine-Tuning and Hyperparameter Optimization: aim to achieve through nutritional guidance.
Fine-tuning based on user feedback and iterative 2) Machine Learning Model with Content-Based optimization of hyperparameters to ensure that the Recommendation: model becomes increasingly adaptable to personalized The Nutritionist Recommender machine learning recommendations.
model follows the content-based recommendation. This model analyzes user profiles, considering factors such as 10 R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 F. Results and Personalized Recomendtions performance suggests a need for further fine-tuning and regularization.
In this section, we investigate the training results of two distinct models, BERT, and a custom neural network. Each b) Learning Rate and Epochs: model is finely tuned for specific tasks, highlighting unique BERT requires fewer epochs for fine-tuning, while learning capabilities. A comparative analysis highlights their the neural network may need more for optimal strengths and trends.
performance.
c) Generalization: BERT excels in generalization due to contextual embeddings. The custom neural network may require more fine-tuning for stability and better generalization.
Fig. 4. BERT Model training Diagram 1) BERT Model (as shown in Fig. 4): Fig. 5. Neural Network Model Training Diagram a) Training Loss and Accuracy Trends: 4) Architecture Model: The training loss consistently decreases, highlighting effective learning and improved a) Inputs: predictions. Training accuracy starts at 84.80%, • desc_input: An input layer for descriptions, which maintaining a stable trend and concluding at 83.96% accepts sequences of a fixed length (256 in this by the 19 th epoch. case).
b) Validation Loss and Accuracy Trends: • ingr_input: Another input layer, for ingredients, Validation loss mirrors the training loss, indicating also accepting sequences of length 256.
effective learning and generalization. Validation • name_input: A third input layer, for the names or accuracy starts at 85.14%, fluctuates significantly, titles, with the same sequence length of 256.
reaching a peak of 84.88%, and ends at 83.93% by the 19 th epoch. These input layers suggest that the model is designed to handle several types of structured input data, each of a fixed size, which is common in multi 2) Custom Neural Network (As shown in Fig. 5): input models where various kinds of data are a) Training Accuracy and Loss Trends: processed.
The model starts with a training accuracy of b) Outputs: 81.67%, concluding at 78.66%. This suggests • Embedding: This layer outputs a 256 x 64 matrix, potential overfitting or a need for adjusting the which indicates that each of the 256 sequence learning rate. Training loss starts at 0.3801, elements is mapped to a 64-dimensional consistently improving to 0.2998, signifying learning embedding.
and enhanced predictions.
• The global_average_pooling 1 d layers following the b) Validation Accuracy and Loss Trends: embedding layers suggest that the model is reducing Validation accuracy starts higher than training the dimensionality of the data, taking the average accuracy, indicating the need for a more challenging over the sequence length, and outputting a 64 validation set. It fluctuates more, hinting at struggles dimensional vector for each.
in generalization. Validation loss starts at 0.8075 and concludes at 0.7798, showing a consistent • Concatenate: This layer combines the outputs of the improvement. three global average pooling layers, resulting in a 192-dimensional vector (since 3 x 64=192).
3) Comparison: a) Accuracy and Loss Trends: • The final layers, dense and dense_1, are fully connected layers that output a 10-dimensional BERT exhibits stable increases in accuracy and vector and a 4-dimensional vector, respectively.
decreases in loss, leveraging its pre-training These are typically used for classification, with the advantage. The custom neural network's fluctuating R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 11 dimensions corresponding to the number of classes preferences, the recommended nutritionist, their location, and or labels being predicted. the ratings received. The table serves as a valuable guide for individuals seeking expert nutrition guidance, ensuring that 5) Personalized Recommendations the recommended professionals are both nearby and highly Table I gives an example of how the nutrition app rated by their peers.
interprets user input, identifies the dietary intent, matches it with an appropriate dietary type, and responds with personalized food recommendations. Each row represents a user scenario, detailing the user input and dietary type TABLE III. NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS and recommends the healthy dietary meal plans according Recommended User Goal Nearby Store to user profile. Supplement Immune Support Vitamin C + Health Haven Pharmacy TABLE I. DIETARY MEAL RECOMMENDATIONS User Input BCAA (Branched Dietary Type Recommendations Muscle Recovery Fitness Essentials Store Intent Chain Amino Acids) I'm a Try our delicious lentil soup or grilled Calcium + Vitamin Vegetarian Bone Health Natural Wellness Market vegetarian veggie bowl D.
Gluten-free How about quinoa salad or grilled Energy Boost MCT Oil Capsules Keto Fuel Superstore Gluten-Free dinner ideas chicken with veggies Protein-rich Snack on almonds, Greek yogurt, or a High-Protein snacks protein smoothie TABLE IV. NUTRITIONIST RECOMMENDATIONS Dietary Recommended Location User Goal Ratings Preferences Nutritionist Looking for Feast on avocado and bacon salad or Keto Vegetarian Dr.Sarah Nutri Care keto meals salmon with veggies Weight Wellness 4.9 Center Management Expert High- Fitness Fuel Athletic Sports Protein Nutrition 4.8 Health Hub Table II explains how the user input is calculated as the Nutrition Studio fitness goal intents, and how it is converted into the Balanced Nutrition Stress Eating recommendations. Diet 4.7 Spa Management Therapist Plant- Green Life TABLE II. EXERCISE RECOMMENDATIONS Vegan Energy Boost Based 4.7 Wellness Nutrition Finest Goal User Input Recommendations Center Personalized Hybrid HIIT incorporating Tables I, II, III, and IV encapsulate the personalized Weight I want to lose weight bodyweight exercises recommendations from the nutrition app, spanning dietary Management and tone my body. and nutritional guidance preferences, exercise routines, nutritional supplements, and based on weight recommended nutritionists. Below is a scenario where these management goals recommendations converge to provide a comprehensive Strength Training with a health and well-being guide.
hybrid approach, I aim to build muscle Muscle Building considering both user mass. a) User Scenario: preferences and targeted muscle groups Jane, a health-conscious individual, inputs her preferences Hybrid Cardio Workouts into the nutrition application.
Improving my tailored to the user's Cardiovascular cardiovascular preferred activities, b) Dietary Recommendations (Table I): Health fitness. considering both Jane states, "I'm a vegetarian.". The application intensity and variety recommends trying the delicious lentil soup or grilled Dynamic 20-minute veggie bowl.
Hybrid Circuit Training Short and effective combining both cardio c) Exercise Recommendations (Table II): Quick Workouts workout ideas. and strength exercises for Jane expresses a fitness goal, "I want to lose weight and tone time-efficient my body." The application suggests a personalized Hybrid effectiveness HIIT, and nutritional guidance based on her weight management goals.
Table III outlines personalized nutritional supplement d) Nutritional Supplement Recommendations (Table III): recommendations generated by the Nutritional Supplement Recommender based on the user’s health goals. Each row For immune support, the app recommends Vitamin C+ represents a user scenario, detailing the health goal, the from Health Haven Pharmacy.
recommended supplement, and the nearby store where the e) Nutritionist Recommendations: supplement can be conveniently purchased.
Considering her weight management goal and vegetarian Table IV provides personalized recommendations for preferences, the app recommends Dr. Sarah, a Wellness nutritionists with top ratings in nearby locations. Each row Expert, with a high rating of 4.9 at Nutri Care Center.
represents a user scenario, detailing the health goal, dietary 12 R. Ramakrishnan et al./ Journal of advances in information science and technology 1(1) 7-12 This integrated approach ensures that Jane receives a Expanding the nutritionist database with a wider holistic set of recommendations tailored to her individual array of specialties and continuously updating the model needs. The nutrition app seamlessly combines insights from to encompass evolving nutritional trends and expertise.
the BERT model, custom neural network, and architecture 5) Accuracy: model, offering Jane a personalized roadmap to health and User-recommended diets and supplements should well-being. This consolidated view provides a detailed not contain allergen items. The recommendations need analysis of model outcomes and demonstrates the practical to be checked with the nutritionist to check whether the application of these findings in offering personalized health recommendations are suitable for the users.
and wellness recommendations.
V. CONCLUSION IV. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS In conclusion, the implementation of our AI-driven There are still some limitations in the system that we plan machine learning model emerges as a promising avenue for to resolve in the future.
nutrition. The focus is to ensure that personalized nutritional guidance reaches every individual, transcending barriers and A. Limitations promoting the well-being of the users. The AI nutrition 1) Data Availability and Quality: application serves as an awareness, enlightening individuals The effectiveness of our recommendation systems about the importance of nutrition and its impact on health.
depends on the availability and quality of data. Limited data or inaccuracies in user input may impact the Using the AI application, the goal is to bridge the precision of recommendations. The users also need to informational gap, empowering individuals to make informed give the correct information to get accurate results. choices about their dietary habits, exercise routines, and nutritional supplement needs for their healthy lifestyle. The 2) Nearby Store Information: recommendations extend to making essential nutritional For the Nutritional Supplement Recommender, the supplements accessible to all users and simplify the process of accuracy of nearby store recommendations is challenging obtaining these crucial elements for a healthy life. AI-driven on real-time data updates. Changes in store inventory or machine learning model represents a pivotal step towards a closures may affect the availability of recommended future where nutritional knowledge is accessible to all users.
supplements.
3) Expertise Scope: In the Nutritionist Recommender, the scope of REFERENCES expertise covered by the content-based recommendation model may have limitations. Incorporating a broader 1. Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles. World Health range of specialties and continuously updating the Organization, 2018.
expertise database is crucial.
2. O. Aguilar-Loja, L. Dioses-Ojeda, J. Armas-Aguirre and P. A. Gonzalez.
A decision tree–based classifier to provide nutritional plans 4) Data Privacy: recommendations. The 17 th Iberian Conference on Information Systems In the current real-world scenario, data privacy is a and Technologies (CISTI), Madrid, Spain, pp. 1-6, 2022.
critical concern when it comes to maintaining databases 3. C. Kosaraju, S. Chiruguri, N. Mohammad, B. T. Jetty and G. Gali. A and safeguarding user information. Organizations model for analysis of diseases based on nutrition deficiency using handling sensitive data, especially in fields like random forest. The 7 th International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES), Coimbatore, India, pp. 1527-1531, 2022.
healthcare, need to ensure the security and privacy of the 4. P. A. Douglas, J. Hyndman and F. Taba. Nutritional counselling in data they collect.
general practice: a cost effective analysis. J Epidemiol Community B. Future Works Health, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 311-316, 1999.
5. A. Said, A. Bellogin. You are what you eat! Tracking health 1) Hybrid Recommendation Models: through recipe interactions. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, The hybrid recommendation models combine vol. 1271, 2014.
collaborative filtering, content-based filtering, and other 6. R. Sakamaki, K. Toyama, R. Amamoto, C. Liu and N. Shinfuku.
emerging techniques to further enhance the precision of Nutritional knowledge, food habits and health attitude of Chinese recommendations for a better user experience. university students, a cross sectional study. Nutrition Journal, 4(4), 2005.
7. G. Sogari, C. Velez-Argumedo, M. Gómez and C. Mora. College 2) Real-Time Data Integration: students and eating habits: A study using an ecological model for healthy Implementing real-time data integration for the behavior. Nutrients, 10(12), p.1823, 2018.
Nutritional Supplement Recommender to ensure up-to- 8. D. Roy, M. Dutta, A systematic review and research perspective on recommender systems. Journal of Big Data, 9(59), 2022.
date information on supplement availability in nearby stores.
3) User Interaction Develop a more sophisticated user feedback system to collect detailed insights on the effectiveness and user satisfaction with recommended exercises, diets, or supplements. Exploring innovative strategies to enhance user engagement, motivation, and adherence to recommended fitness and nutrition plans, fostering longterm lifestyle changes.
4) Expanded Nutritionist Database: