Mechanism of feature learning in convolutional neural networks Daniel Beaglehole∗,2 Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan∗,3,4 Parthe Pandit 1 Mikhail Belkin 1,2 1 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, UC San Diego.
2 Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego.
3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard.
∗Equal contribution.
Abstract Understanding the mechanism of how convolutional neural networks learn features from image data is a fundamental problem in machine learning and computer vision. In this work, we identify such a mechanism. We posit the Convolutional Neural Feature Ansatz, which states that covariances of filters in any convolutional layer are proportional to the average gradient outer product (AGOP) taken with respect to patches of the input to that layer. We present extensive empirical evidence for our ansatz, including identifying high correlation between covariances of filters and patch-based AGOP s for convolutional layers in standard neural architectures, such as Alex Net, VGG, and Res Nets pre-trained on Image Net. We also provide supporting theoretical evidence. We then demonstrate the generality of our result by using the patch-based AGOP to enable deep feature learning in convolutional kernel machines. We refer to the resulting algorithm as (Deep) Conv RFM and show that our algorithm recovers similar features to deep convolutional networks including the notable emergence of edge detectors. Moreover, we find that Deep Conv RFM overcomes previously identified limitations of convolutional kernels, such as their inability to adapt to local signals in images and, as a result, leads to sizable performance improvement over fixed convolutional kernels.
1 Introduction Neural networks have achieved impressive empirical results across various tasks in natural language processing [8], computer vision [39], and biology [50]. Yet, our understanding of the mechanisms driving the successes of these models is still emerging. One such mechanism of central importance is that of neural feature learning, which is the ability of networks to automatically learn relevant input transformations from data [37, 43, 55, 56].
An important line of work [5, 14, 23, 32, 35, 43, 52, 55] has demonstrated how feature learning in fully connected neural networks provides an advantage over classical, non-feature-learning models such as kernel machines. Recently, the work [37] identified a connection between a mathematical operator, known as average gradient outer product (AGOP) [17, 21, 47, 48], and feature learning in fully connected networks.
This work subsequently demonstrated that the AGOP could be used to enable similar feature learning in kernel machines operating on tabular data. In contrast to the case for fully connected networks, there are few prior works [3, 24] analyzing feature learning in convolutional networks, which have been transformative in computer vision [19, 39]. The work [24] demonstrates an advantage of feature learning in convolutional networks by showing that these models are able to threshold noise and identify signal in image data unlike convolutional kernel methods including Convolutional Neural Tangent Kernels [4]. The work [3] analyzes how deep convolutional networks can correct features in early layers by simultaneous training of all layers. While these prior works identify advantages of feature learning in convolutional networks, they do not identify a general operator that captures such feature learning. The connection between AGOP and feature learning 1 3202 pe S 1 ]LM.tats[ 1 v 07500.9032:vi Xra in fully connected neural networks [37] suggests that a similar connection should exist for feature learning in convolutional networks. Moreover, such a mechanism could be used to learn analogous features with any machine learning model such as convolutional kernel machines.
In this work, we establish a connection between convolutional neural feature learning and the AGOP, which we posit as the Convolutional Neural Feature Ansatz (CNFA). Unlike the fully connected case from [37] where feature learning is characterized by AGOP with respect to network inputs, we demonstrate that convolutional feature learning is characterized by AGOP with respect to patches of network inputs. We present empirical evidence for the CNFA by demonstrating high average Pearson correlation (in most cases > .9) between AGOP on patches and the covariance of filters across all layers of pre-trained convolutional networks on Image Net [40] and across all layers of Simple Net [18] trained on several standard image classification datasets. We additionally prove that the CNFA holds for one step of gradient descent for deep convolutional networks. To demonstrate the generality of our identified convolutional feature learning mechanism, we leverage the AGOP on patches to enable feature learning in convolutional kernel machines. We refer to the resulting algorithm as Conv RFM. We demonstrate that Conv RFM captures features similar to those learned by the first layer of convolutional networks. In particular, on various image classification benchmark datasets such as SVHN [33] and CIFAR 10 [26], we observe that Conv RFM recovers features corresponding to edge detectors. We further enable deep feature learning with convolutional kernels by developing a layerwise training scheme with Conv RFM, which we refer to as Deep Conv RFM. We demonstrate that Deep Conv RFM learns features similar to those learned by deep convolutional neural networks. Furthermore, we show that Deep Conv RFM overcomes limitations of convolutional kernels identified in [24] and exhibits local feature adaptivity. Lastly, we demonstrate that Deep Conv RFM provides improvement over CNTK and Conv RFM on several standard image classification datasets, indicating a benefit to deep feature learning. Our results advance understanding of how convolutional networks automatically learn features from data and provide a path toward integrating convolutional feature learning into general machine learning models.
2 Convolutional Neural Feature Ansatz (CNFA) Let f : Rc×P×Q → R denote a convolutional neural network (CNN) operating on P×Q resolution images with c color channels. The ℓth convolutional layer of a CNN involves applying a function h : Rc ℓ−1 ×P ℓ−1 ×Q ℓ−1 → ℓ Rc ℓ ×P ℓ ×Q ℓ defined recursively as h (x) = ϕ(W(cid:102) ∗h (x)) with h = x, W(cid:102) ∈ Rc ℓ ×c ℓ−1 ×q×q denoting c filters ℓ ℓ ℓ−1 1 ℓ ℓ of size c ×q×q, ∗ denoting the convolution operation, and ϕ denoting an elementwise activation function.
ℓ−1 To understand how features emerge in convolutional networks, we abstract a convolutional network to a function of the form f(x) = g(W x[1,1],...,W x[i,j],...,W x[P,Q]), i ∈ [P],j ∈ [Q] ; (1) 1 1 1 where W ∈ Rc 1 ×cq 2 is a matrix of c stacked filters of size cq 2 and x[i,j] ∈ Rcq 2 denotes the patch of x 1 1 centered at coordinate (i,j). This abstraction is helpful since it allows us to consider feature learning in convolutional networks with arbitrary architecture (e.g., pooling layers, batch normalization, etc.) after any given convolutional layer. Up to rotation and reflection by the left singular vectors, the feature extraction properties of W are determined by the singular values and right singular vectors of W . These singular 1 1 values and vectors can be recovered from the matrix WTW , which is the empirical (uncentered) covariance 1 1 of filters in the first layer. This argument extends to analyze features selected at layer ℓ of a CNN by considering a function of the form f(x) = g (W h (x)[1,1],...,W h (x)[P ,Q ]). We refer to the ℓ ℓ ℓ−1 ℓ ℓ−1 ℓ−1 ℓ−1 matrix WTW as a Convolutional Neural Feature Matrix (CNFM) and note that this matrix is proportional ℓ ℓ to the (uncentered) empirical covariance matrix of filters in layer ℓ.
We use the form of convolutional networks presented in Eq. (1) to state our Convolutional Neural Feature Ansatz (CNFA). Let G (x) := g (W h (x)[1,1],...,W h (x)[P ,Q ]). Then, after training f for at ℓ ℓ ℓ ℓ−1 ℓ ℓ−1 ℓ−1 ℓ−1 least one epoch of (stochastic) gradient descent on standard loss functions: n W⊤W ∝ (cid:88) (cid:88) ∇ G (x) (cid:0) ∇ G (x) (cid:1)⊤ ; (2) ℓ ℓ h ℓ−1 (x)[i,j] ℓ h ℓ−1 (x)[i,j] ℓ p=1(i,j)∈S where S = {(i,j)} denotes the set of indices of patches utilized in the convolution operation i∈[P ],j∈[Q ] ℓ−1 ℓ−1 in layer ℓ. The CNFA (Eq. 2) mathematically implies that the convolutional neural feature matrices are 2 Alex Net VGG 11 VGG 13 VGG 16 VGG 19 VGG 11 BN VGG 13 BN VGG 16 BN VGG 19 BN Res Net 18 Res Net 34 Res Net 50 Res Net 101 Res Net 152 noitalerro C nosrae P A CNFA Verification for Pre-trained Models on Image Net B Initial NFM Trained NFM AGOP 1 0.9 Res Net 18 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 VGG 11 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 Alex Net 0 Initial CNFM and Trained NFM Trained CNFM and AGOP Figure 1: A. Correlation between initial CNFM and trained CNFM (red) and trained CNFM with AGOP (green) for convolutional layers in VGG, Alex Net, and Res Net on Image Net (224 × 224 resolution color images). B. Initial CNFM, trained CNFM, and AGOP matrices for the first convolutional layer of Res Net 18, VGG 11, and Alex Net on Image Net.
proportional to the average gradient outer product (AGOP) with respect to the patches of the input to layer ℓ. The CNFA implies that the structure of covariance matrices of filters in convolutional networks, an object studied in prior work [49], corresponds to AGOP over patches. Intuitively, the CNFA implies that convolutional features are constructed by identifying and amplifying those pixels in any patch that most change the output of the network. We now present extensive empirical evidence corroborating our ansatz.
We subsequently present supporting theoretical evidence.
2.1 Empirical evidence for CNFA We now provide empirical evidence for the ansatz by computing the correlation between CNFM s and the AGOP for each convolutional layer in various CNN s. We provide three lines of evidence by computing correlations for the following models: (1) Alex Net [27], all VGG s [46], and all Res Net [19] models pre-trained on Image Net [40] ; (2) Simple Net models [18] trained on SVHN [33], GTSRB [20], CIFAR 10 [26], CIFAR 100, and Image Net 32 [10]; and (3) shallow CNN s across 10 standard computer vision datasets from Py Torch upon varying pooling and patch size of convolution operations. The first set of experiments provides evidence for the ansatz in large-scale state-of-the-art models on Image Net. The second set provides evidence for the ansatz across standard computer vision datasets. The last set provides evidence for the ansatz holding across architecture choices.
CNFA verification for pre-trained state-of-the-art models on Image Net. We begin by providing evidence for the ansatz on pre-trained state-of-the-art models on Image Net. In Fig. 1, we present these correlations for Alex Net, all VGG models and all Res Net models pre-trained on Image Net, which are available for download from the Py Torch library [36].4 As a control, we verify that weights at the end of training are far from initialization (see the red bars in Fig. 1 A). Note that despite the complexity involved in training these models (e.g., batch normalization, skip connections, custom optimization procedures, data augmentation) the Pearson correlation between the AGOP and CNFM s are remarkably high (> .9 for each layer of Alex Net and VGG 13). In Fig. 1 B, we additionally visualize the AGOP and CNFM for the first convolutional layer in Alex Net, VGG 11, and Res Net 18 to demonstrate the qualitative similarity between these matrices. In addition, in Appendix Fig. 7, we verify that these correlations are lower at initialization than at the end of training indicating that the ansatz is, in fact, a consequence of training.
CNFA verification for Simple Net on CIFAR 10, CIFAR 100, Image Net 32, SVHN, GTSRB.
To verify the ansatz on other datasets, we also trained the Simple Net model on five datasets including 4 We evaluate all correlations between AGOP and CNFM s for all convolutional layers of Alex Net and all VGG s. To simplify computation on Res Nets, we evaluate correlations between AGOP and CNFM s for the first layer in each Basic Block and each Bottleneck, as defined in Py Torch. We note that for Res Net 152, this computation involves computing correlation between matrices in 50 Bottleneck blocks.
3 Input Image Input Image VGG 11 Alex Net VGG 11 Alex Net +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4 Figure 2: Comparison of features extracted by CNFM s and AGOP s across layers of VGG 11 and Alex Net for two input images. These visualizations provide further supporting evidence that the CNFM s and AGOP s of early layers are performing an operation akin to edge detection.
CIFAR 10/100, Image Net 32, SVHN, and GTSRB. We note Simple Net had achieved state-of-the-art results on several of these tasks at the time of its release (e.g., > 95% test accuracy on CIFAR 10). We train Simple Net models using the same optimization procedure provided from [18] (i.e., Adadelta [57] with weight decay and manual learning rate scheduling). We use a small initialization scheme of normally distributed weights with a standard deviation of 10−4 for convolutional layers. We note that we were able to recover high test accuracies across all datasets consistent with the results from [18] (see test accuracies for these trained Simple Net models in Appendix Fig. 8). As shown in Appendix Fig. 8, we observe consistently high correlation between AGOP s and CNFM s across layers of Simple Net.
CNFA is robust to hyperparameter choices. We lastly study the effect of patch size and architecture choices on the CNFA for networks trained using the Adam optimizer [25]. We generally observe that larger patch sizes slightly reduce the correlation between AGOP and CNFM s, and that max pooling layers (in contrast to no pooling or average pooling) lead to higher correlation (Appendix Fig. 9). Interestingly, these results indicate that the choices used in state-of-the-art CNN s (max pooling layers and patch size of 3) are consistent with those that lead to highest correlation between AGOP and CNFM s.
2.2 Visualizing features captured by CNFM and AGOP We now visualize how the CNFM operates on patches of images to select features and demonstrate that AGOP over patches captures similar features. Both the CNFM and AGOP yield an operator on patches of images. Thus, to visualize how these matrices select features, we expand input images into individual patches, then apply either the CNFM or the AGOP to each patch. We then reduce the expanded image back to its original size by taking the norm over the spatial dimensions of each expanded patch. Formally, the 4 1 value for each coordinate (i,j) ∈ P ×Q is replaced with ∥M 2 h (X)[i,j]∥ where M := WTW . Our ℓ−1 ℓ−1 ℓ ℓ−1 ℓ ℓ ℓ visualization reflects the magnitude of the patch in the image of the patch transformation. For example, if 1 M is an edge detector, then ∥M 2 h (X)[i,j]∥ will be large, if and only if the patch centered at coordinate ℓ ℓ ℓ−1 (i,j) contains an edge.
This visualization technique emerges naturally from the convolution operation in CNN s, where a postactivation hidden unit is generated by applying a filter to each patch independently of the others. Further, this visualization characterizes how a trained CNN extracts features across patches of any image. This is in contrast to visualization techniques based on saliency maps [41, 44, 45, 59], which consider gradients with respect to an entire input image and for a single sample.
In addition to the high correlation between AGOP and CNFM s in the previous section, in Fig. 2, we observe that the AGOP and CNFM s transform input images similarly at any given layer of the CNN. For 224 × 224 images from Image Net, CNFM s and AGOP s extracted from a pre-trained VGG 11 model both emphasize objects and their edges in the image. We note these visualizations corroborate hypotheses from prior work that the first layer weights of deep CNN s learn an operator corresponding to edge detection [58].
Moreover, our results imply that the mathematical origin of edge detectors in convolutional neural networks is the average gradient outer product. In the following section, we will corroborate this claim by demonstrating that such edge detectors can be recovered without the use of any neural network through estimating the average gradient outer product of convolutional kernel machines.
2.3 Supporting Theoretical Evidence for CNFA The following theorem (proof in Appendix A) proves the ansatz for general convolutional networks after 1 step of full-batch gradient descent.
Theorem 1. Let f denote a function that operates on m patches of size q, i.e., let f(v ,v ,...,v ) : 1 2 m Rq × ... × Rq → R with f(v ,v ,...,v ) = g(Wv ,Wv ,...,Wv ) where W ∈ Rk×q and g(z ,...,z ) : 1 2 m 1 2 m 1 m Rk × ... × Rk → R. Assume g(0) = 0 and ∂g(0) = ∂g(0) ̸= 0 for all ℓ,ℓ′ ∈ [m]. If W is trained for one step ∂z ℓ ∂z ℓ′ of gradient descent with mean squared loss on data {((v (p) ,...v (p) ),y )}n from initialization W(0) = 0, 1 m p p=1 then for the point (u ,...,u ): 1 m m T W(1) T W(1) ∝ (cid:88) ∂f(1)(u 1 ,...,u m ) ∂f(1)(u 1 ,...,u m ) ; (3) ∂v ∂v r r r=1 where f(1)(v ,v ,...v ) := g(W(1)v ,W(1)v ,...,W(1)v ).
1 2 m 1 2 m We note the assumptions of Theorem 1 hold for several types of convolutional networks. As a simple example, the assumptions hold for convolutional networks with activation function ϕ satisfying ϕ(0) = 0 and ϕ′(0) ̸= 0 (e.g., tanh activation) with remaining layers initialized as constant matrices. Furthermore, we note that while the above theorem is stated for the first layer of a convolutional network, the same proof strategy applies for deeper layers by considering the subnetwork G (x).
ℓ 3 CNFA as a general mechanism for convolutional feature learning We now show that the CNFA allows us to introduce a feature learning mechanism in any machine learning model on patches to capture features akin to those of convolutional networks. Given recent work connecting neural networks to kernel machines [22], we focus on convolutional kernels given by the Convolutional Neural Tangent Kernel (CNTK) [4] as our candidate model class. Intuitively, these models can be thought of as combining kernels evaluated across pairs of patches in images. While such models have achieved impressive performance [1, 6, 7, 29, 38, 42], these models do not automatically learn features from data unlike CNN s.
Thus, as demonstrated in prior work [24, 52], there are tasks where CNTK s are significantly outperformed by corresponding CNN s.
A major consequence of the CNFA is that we can now enable feature learning in CNTK s by leveraging the AGOP over patches. In particular, we can first solve kernel regression with the CNTK and then use 5 Algorithm 1 Convolutional Recursive Feature Machine (Conv RFM) Input: X,y,K ,T,q ▷ Train data: (X,y), kernel: K , iters.: T, and patch size: q M M Output: α,M ▷ Solution to kernel regression: α, and feature matrix: M M = I ▷ Initialize M to be the identity matrix of size cq 2 × cq 2 cq 2 for t ∈ T do K = K (X,X) ▷ K (X,X) := K (x ,x ) train M M i,j M i j α = y K−1 train M = 1 (cid:80) (cid:80) (∇ f(x))(∇ f(x))T ▷ f(x) = αK (X,x) n x∈X (u,v)∈S x[u,v] x[u,v] M end for the AGOP of the trained predictor over patches of images to learn features. We call our method the Convolutional Recursive Feature Machine (Conv RFM), as it is the convolutional variant of the original RFM [37]. We will demonstrate that Conv RFM accurately captures first layer feature learning in CNN s and can recover edge detectors as features when trained on standard image classification datasets. To account for deep convolutional feature learning, we extend Conv RFM to Deep Conv RFM s by sequentially learning features in a manner similar to layerwise training in CNN s. We show that Deep Conv RFM: (1) improves performance of CNTK s on local signal adaptivity tasks considered in [24] ; and (2) improves performance of CNTK s on several image classification tasks.
3.1 Convolutional Recursive Feature Machine (Conv RFM) We present the algorithm for Conv RFM in Algorithm 1. The Conv RFM algorithm recursively learns a feature extractor on patches of a given image by implementing the AGOP across patches of training data.
Namely, the Conv RFM first builds a predictor with a fixed convolutional kernel. Then, we compute the AGOP of the trained predictor with respect to image patches, which we denote as the feature matrix, M.
Lastly, we transform image patches with M and then repeat the previous steps. We provide a concrete example of this algorithm for the convolutional neural network Gausssian process (CNNGP) [9, 28] of a one hidden layer convolutional network with fully connected last layer operating on black and white images below.
The CNNGP of a one hidden layer convolutional network with fully connected last layer, activation ϕ, and filter size q is given by P Q 1 (cid:88)(cid:88) K(x,z) = ϕ ˇ (x[i,j]Tz[i,j],∥x[i,j]∥,∥z[i,j]∥) ; PQ i=1 j=1 where x,z ∈ RP×Q, x[i,j] ∈ Rq 2 denotes the vectorized q × q patch of x centered at coordinate (i,j), and ϕ ˇ (a Tb,∥a∥,∥b∥) denotes the dual activation [15] of ϕ. For the case of Re LU activation, this dual activation has a well known form [9] and is given by 1 (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) a Tb (cid:19)(cid:19) (cid:113) (cid:19) ϕ ˇ (a Tb,∥a∥,∥b∥) = a Tb π − arccos + ∥a∥2∥b∥2 − a Tb .
π ∥a∥∥b∥ In Conv RFM, we modify the inner product in the kernel above to be a Mahalanobis inner product, constructing kernels of the form P Q 1 (cid:88)(cid:88) K (x,z) := ϕ ˇ (x[i,j]TM z[i,j],x[i,j]TM x[i,j],z[i,j]TM z[i,j]) ; M PQ i=1 j=1 where M is a learned positive semi-definite matrix. In particular, M is updated as the AGOP of the estimator constructed by solving kernel regression with K . In our experiments, we analyze performance when M ˇ replacing ϕ with the Mahanolobis Laplace kernel used in [37] and with the CNTK of a deep convolutional ˇ Re LU network with fully connected last layer. We will make clear our choice of ϕ by denoting our method as CNTK-Conv RFM or Laplace-Conv RFM.
6 +AGOP +AGOP A Eigenvectors of CNTK-Conv RFMAGOP (SVHN) B Input Image +AGOP +CNFM C Input Image CNTK-Conv RFM Laplace-Conv RFM CNTK-Conv RFM CNN SVHN SVHN Eigenvectors of Laplace-Conv RFMAGOP (SVHN) Figure 3: Features extractors learned by Conv RFM using CNTK (CNTK-Conv RFM) and Laplace kernel (Laplace-Conv RFM), which appear to operate as universal edge detectors. A. Top 8 eigenvectors of CNTKC onv RFM and Laplace-Conv RFM trained on SVHN. We use 3×3 patches for CNTK-Conv RFM and 7×7 patches for Laplace-Conv RFM. B. Comparison of patch operators learned by CNTK-Conv RFM (given by the AGOP taken with respect to patches) and CNN s (given by the CNFM). C. Applying patch-based AGOP operators from Conv RFM s trained on SVHN to images from Image Net.
Conv RFM captures first layer features of convolutional neural networks. We now demonstrate that Conv RFM recovers features similar to those learned by first layers of CNN s. In Fig. 3 A, we visualize the top eigenvectors of the feature matrix of CNTK-Conv RFM (filter size 3 × 3) and Laplace-Conv RFM (filter size 7×7) trained on SVHN. Training details for all methods are presented in Appendix B. We observe that these top eigenvectors resemble edge detectors [16]. In Fig. 3 B, we visualize how the feature matrix of the CNTK-Conv RFM and the CNFM of the corresponding finite width CNN trained on SVHN transform SVHN images. Even though both operators arise from vastly different training procedures (solving kernel regression vs. training a CNN), we observe that both operators appear to extract similar features (corresponding to edges of digits) from SVHN images. We provide additional evidence for similarity between Conv RFM and CNN features in Appendix Fig. 10. To demonstrate further evidence of the universality of edge detector features arising from AGOP of CNTK-Conv RFM and Laplace-Conv RFM, we analyze how these AGOP s transform arbitrary images. In particular, in Fig. 3 C, we apply these operators extracted from models trained on SVHN to images on Image Net. We again observe that these operators remarkably extract edges from corresponding Image Net images, which are of vastly different resolution (224 × 224 instead of 32 × 32) and contain vastly different objects. Such experiments provide conclusive evidence that AGOP with respect to patches of convolutional kernels recovers features akin to edge detectors. We present further experiments demonstrating emergence of edge detectors from convolutional kernels trained on CIFAR 10 and GTSRB in Appendix Figs. 11 and 12. In particular, the eigenvectors of the AGOP often resemble Gabor filters with different orientations. In Figure 11, we see that horizontally, vertically, and diagonally aligned eigenvectors identify edges of the same alignment.
3.2 Deep feature learning with Deep Conv RFM Conv RFM is capable of only extracting features by linearly transforming patches of input images, which is analogous to extracting such features using the first layer of a CNN. In contrast, the CNFA implies that deep convolutional networks are capable of learning features in intermediate layers. To enable deep feature learning, we introduce Deep Conv RFM (see Algorithm 2) by sequentially learning features with AGOP in a manner similar to layerwise training in CNN s. In particular, Deep Conv RFM iterates the following steps: 1. Construct a predictor, f(cid:98), by training a convolutional kernel machine with kernel K .
M 7 Input Input Input Input Image Image Image Image +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM +AGOP +CNFM (Deep Conv RFM) (CNN) (Deep Conv RFM) (CNN) (Deep Conv RFM) (CNN) (Deep Conv RFM) (CNN) Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Figure 4: Visualizations of features for each layer of Deep Conv RFM and the corresponding CNN on SVHN and the noisy digits task from [24].
2. Update M to be the AGOP with respect to patches of the trained predictor.
3. Transform the data, x, with random features given by ϕ(Wx) where W denotes a set of convolutional filters with weights sampled according to N(0,M) and ϕ is a nonlinearity.
Note that while we utilize random features and sample convolutional filters in Deep Conv RFM, we never utilize backpropgation to learn features or train models. Features are learned via the AGOP and models are trained by solving kernel regression, which is a convex optimization problem. For the base kernel for Deep Conv RFM, we utilize the deep CNTK [4] as implemented in the Neural Tangents library [34].5 Deep Conv RFM learns similar features to deep CNN s. We now present evidence that Deep Conv RFM s learn similar features to those learned by deep CNN s. We analyze features learned by deep Conv RFM and the corresponding CNN on the local signal adaptivity synthetic tasks from [24] and SVHN. For the synthetic task from [24], we consider classification of MNIST digits embedded in a larger image of i.i.d. Gaussian noise. Dataset and training details are presented in Appendix B. In Fig. 4, we observe that AGOP s at each layer of Deep Conv RFM and and CNFM s at each layer of the corresponding CNN transform examples from both datasets similarly.
5 In order to take gradient with respect to patches using Neural Tangents, we used a workaround that involved expanding images into their patch representations. This workaround unfortunately leads to heavy memory utilization, which limited our analysis of Deep Conv RFM s.
Algorithm 2 Deep Convolutional Recursive Feature Machine (Deep Conv RFM) Input: X,y,{K } ,T,L,q,k ▷ kernels: {K } , depth: L, channels: k ℓ ℓ ℓ ℓ Output: α ,{M }L L ℓ ℓ=1 X = X ▷ Initialize embedding 1 for ℓ ∈ L do α ,M = Conv RFM(X ,y,K ,T,q) ℓ ℓ ℓ ℓ Sample k filters W ∼ N(0,M ) ▷ W ∈ Rk×q×q ℓ,k′ ℓ ℓ X = ϕ(W ∗ X ) ▷ ϕ: element-wise non-linearity ℓ+1 ℓ ℓ end for 8 A B 100 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 ycarucc A tse T Black and White Horizontal Bars in Noise 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Noise Std. Dev.
Depth 3 - CNTK Depth 3 - Conv RFM Depth 3 - Deep Conv RFM 3-CNN ycarucc A tse T MNIST Digits in Noise Noise Std. Dev.
Depth 3 - CNTK Depth 3 - Conv RFM Depth 3 - Deep Conv RFM 3-CNN Figure 5: Test accuracy of CNTK, Conv RFM, Deep Conv RFM, and the corresponding CNN on local signal adaptivity tasks from [24] as a function of noise level. A. Identifying black and white bars in noisy images.
B. MNIST digits placed randomly in noisy background image.
Deep Conv RFM overcomes limitations of convolutional kernels. In the work [24] the authors posited local signal adaptivity, the ability to suppress noise and amplify signal in images, as a potential explanation for the superiority of convolutional neural networks over convolutional kernels. As supporting evidence, [24] demonstrated that convolutional networks generalized far better than convolutional kernels on image classification tasks in which images were embedded in a noisy background. We now demonstrate that by incorporating feature learning through patch-AGOP s, Deep Conv RFM exhibits local signal adaptivity on the tasks considered in [24] and thus, similar to CNN s, yield significantly improved performance over convolutional kernels. In particular, we begin by comparing performance of CNTK, Conv RFM, Deep Conv RFM, and corresponding CNN s on the following two image classification tasks from [24]: (1) images of black and white horizontal bars placed in a random position on larger images of Gaussian noise ; (2) MNIST images placed in a random position on larger images of Gausssian noise. The work [24] demonstrated that CNN s, unlike CNTK, could learn to threshold the background noise and amplify the signal in these tasks thus far outperforming CNTK s when the amount of background noise was large. In Fig. 5, we demonstrate that for these tasks CNN s, Conv RFM s, and Deep Conv RFM s all extract local signals and dim background noise through the AGOP, and thus far outperform CNTK s. Moreover, we observe that Deep Conv RFM s can provide up to a 5% improvement in performance over Conv RFM on the synthetic MNIST task, indicating a benefit to deep feature learning.
Benefit of deep feature learning on real-world image classification tasks. Lastly, we analyze performance of CNTK, Conv RFM, Deep Conv RFM, and the corresponding three convolutional layer CNN on standard image classification datasets available for download from Py Torch. Consistent with our observations for synthetic tasks from [24], we observe in Fig. 6 A that Conv RFM and Deep Conv RFM provide an improvement over CNTK across almost all tasks. Moreover, we observe that Conv RFM and Deep Conv RFM outperform CNTK s consistently when the corresponding CNN outperforms the CNTK. In Fig. 6 B, we analyze the impact of deep feature learning by increasing the number of feature learning layers in Deep Conv RFM, i.e., the number of layers for which we utilize the AGOP to learn features. We observe that adding more layers of feature learning leads to consistent performance boost in the local signal adaptivity tasks from [24] and on select datasets such as SVHN and EMNIST [13].
4 Discussion In this work, we identified a mathematical mechanism of feature learning in deep convolutional networks, which we posited as the Convolutional Neural Feature Ansatz (CNFA). Namely, the ansatz stated that features selected by convolutional networks, given by empirical covariance matrices of filters at any given layer, can be recovered by computing the average gradient outer product (AGOP) of the trained network 9 A Test accuracy (%) B Deep Dataset CNTK Conv RFM 3-CNN Conv RFM 20 SVHN 81.38 85.02 87.28 84.48±0.33 15 CIFAR-10 67.74 67.97 67.97 64.90±0.16 10 CIFAR-100 37.64 37.64 37.64 29.78±0.17 5 GTSRB 91.76 93.02 93.02 93.35±0.34 0 EMNIST 86.01 86.73 87.60 88.35±0.22 0 1 2 3 tnemevorpm I % Performance of Deep RFM Number of Feature Learning Layers SVHN EMNIST Noisy MNIST Digits Horizontal Bars in Noise Figure 6: A. Performance comparison of Deep Conv RFM with the corresponding CNTK and CNN on benchmark image classification datasets from Py Torch. B. Effect of number of feature learning layers on Deep Conv RFM performance.
with respect to image patches. We presented empirical and theoretical evidence for the ansatz. Notably, we showed that convolutional filter covariances of neural networks pre-trained on Image Net (Alex Net, VGG, Res Net) are highly correlated with AGOP with respect to patches (in many cases, Pearson correlation > .9).
Since the AGOP with respect to patches can be computed on any function operating on image patches, we could use the AGOP to enable feature learning in any machine learning model operating on image patches.
Thus, building on the RFM algorithm for fully connected networks from [37], we integrated the AGOP to enable deep feature learning in convolutional kernel machines, which could not apriori learn features, and referred to the resulting algorithms as Conv RFM and Deep Conv RFM. We demonstrated that Conv RFM and Deep Conv RFM recover features similar to those of deep convolutional neural networks, including evidence that features learned by these models can serve as universal edge detectors, akin to features learned in convolutional networks. Moreover, we demonstrated that Conv RFM and Deep Conv RFM overcome prior limitations of convolutional kernels, including the Convolutional Neural Tangent Kernel (CNTK), such the inability to adapt to localized signals in images [24]. Lastly, we showed a benefit to deep feature learning by demonstrating improvement in performance of Deep Conv RFM over Conv RFM and the CNTK on standard image classification benchmarks. We now conclude with a discussion of implications of our results and future directions.
Identifying mechanisms driving success of deep learning. Understanding the mechanisms driving success of neural networks is an important problem for developing effective, interpretable and safe machine learning models. The complexities of training deep neural networks such as custom training procedures and layer structures (batch normalization, dropout, residual connections, etc.) can make it difficult to pinpoint overarching principles leading to effectiveness of these models. The fact that correlation between convolutional neural feature matrices (CNFM s) and AGOP s is high for convolutional networks pre-trained on Image Net with all of these inherent complexities baked in, provides strong evidence that the connection between AGOP and CNFM s is key to identifying the core principles making these networks successful.
Emergence of universal edge detectors with average gradient outer product. Detecting edges in images is a well-studied task in computer vision and classical approaches involved applying fixed convolutional filters to detect edges in images [2, 16, 54]. For example, Alex Net automatically learned filters in its first convolutional layer that were remarkably similar to Gabor filters [30]. Similarly, there was evidence that other convolutional networks pre-trained on Image Net learned features akin to edge detection in the first layer [58]. Yet, it had been unclear how such filters automatically emerge through training. We demonstrated that the AGOP with respect to patches of a large class of convolutional models (convolutional neural networks and convolutional kernels) trained on various standard image classification tasks consistently recovered edge detectors (see Fig. 2, Fig. 3 A, B). We further showed the universality of these edge detector features by demonstrating that features learned by Conv RFM on SVHN automatically identified edges in Image Net 10