- Journal manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Leveraging Big Data Analytics in Healthcare Enhancement:
Trends, Challenges and Opportunities
Arshia Rehman · Saeeda Naz · Imran Razzak
thedateofreceiptandacceptanceshouldbeinsertedlater
Abstract Clinicians decisions are becoming more and ends with the notable applications and challenges in
more evidence-based meaning in no other field the big adoption of big data analytics in healthcare.
dataanalyticssopromisingasinhealthcare.Duetothe
Keywords Big Data Analytics · , Medical Image
sheer size and availability of healthcare data, big data
Processing and Imaging Informatics · Bioinformatics
analyticshasrevolutionizedthisindustryandpromises
and Genomics · Clinical informatics · Public Health
us a world of opportunities. It promises us the power
informatics · Medical Signal Analytics
of early detection, prediction, prevention and helps us
to improve the quality of life. Researchers and clini-
cians are working to inhibit big data from having a
1 Introduction
positive impact on health in the future. Different tools
andtechniquesarebeingusedtoanalyze,process,accu- Due to the sheer size and availability of multidimen-
mulate, assimilate and manage large amount of health- sional data, the rate of technological innovation have
care data either in structured or unstructured form. In the huge potential to make a an extra ordinary im-
this paper, we would like to address the need of big pact on our daily life in different disciplines especially
data analytics in healthcare: why and how can it help inhealthcaresector.Therapidlygrowingandexploited
to improve life?. We present the emerging landscape data will refer to introduce a new gigantic term known
of big data and analytical techniques in the five sub- as big data. Uncovering information from such com-
disciplines of healthcare i.e.medical image analysis and plicated nature of data is often complex process. The
imaging informatics, bioinformatics, clinical informat- developmentandanalysisoftoolsandmethodsforanal-
ics, public health informatics and medical signal ana- ysisofsuchlargequantitiesofdataprovidesuswithan
lytics. We presents different architectures, advantages opportunitytomakethetransitionintothisnewerafar
and repositories of each discipline that draws an inte- easier.Havingdata-driven,real-timeinsightsaccessible
grated depiction of how distinct healthcare activities to the organization through analytics can be a critical
areaccomplishedinthepipelinetofacilitateindividual enabler for executing the organization strategies. Big
patients from multiple perspectives. Finally the paper data analytics greatest asset is its possibilities and its
need to find new ways to provide the services that we
A.Rehman are looking for.
Computer Science Department, Govt. Girls Postgraduate Unlike other field, big data analytics is so promis-
CollegeNo.1,Abbottabad,KPK,Pakistan
ing in healthcare sector and received much more at-
E-mail:arshiar29@gmail.com
tention in the last few years. Clinicians decisions are
S.Naz
becoming evidence-based, meaning that they are rely-
Computer Science Department, Govt. Girls Postgraduate
ing more on large swathes of research and clinical data
CollegeNo.1,Abbottabad,KPK,Pakistan
E-mail:saeedanaz292@gmail.com as opposed to solely their schooling and professional
opinion. Big data in terms of healthcare is defined as
I.Razzak
DeakinUniversity,Geelong,Australia thenamegiventolargerandcomplexelectronichealth-
E-mail:imran.razzak@ieee.org caredatasetsthatareproblematicoralmostimpossible
0202
rpA
5
]TO.tats[
1v01090.4002:viXra
2 ArshiaRehmanet al.
to manage by employing common traditional methods,
tools or software [83,204,17]. Big data in healthcare is
generatedbyhealthcarerecord(suchaspatientsrecord,
diseasesurveillance,hospital,medicine,healthmanage-
ment, doctor, clinical decision support or feedback of
patient [36,65,81,82]) and clinical data (like imaging,
personal, financial record, genetic and pharmaceutical
data and Electronic Medical Records (EMR) etc. [259,
183]). The generation and management of these enor-
mous healthcare records is considered to be very com-
plex thus, big data analytics is introduced [278,272].
With the rise of technological innovation and person-
alised medicine, big data analytics has the potential
to make a huge impact on our life i.e. how it helps to
predict, prevent, manage, treat and cure disease. Fur- Fig.1 HealthcareEcosystemassistedBybigdataandCloud
thermore, it helps, government agencies, policy maker Computing[168]
and hospital to manage resources, improving medical
research,planningpreventativemethodsandmanaging
epidemic.
medical informatics like Proteomics DB [275] contains
With the advancement in information technology
data volume of 5.17 TB covering 92% of human genes
andemergenceofdigitizedcomputerizedsystems,hard
informationexplainedinSwiss-Protdatabase.Vastamount
copy medical data is tend to move towards Electronic
of volume is produced from medical images like Visible
HealthRecords(EHR)andElectronicMedicalRecords
HumanProjectcomprehendsfemaledata-setsof39GB
(EMR) systems. These systems generated exponential
[3].Itisestimatedthatvolumeofbigdatainhealthcare
growth of data [237,212]. Health data is not only col-
increased to 35 zeta-bytes by 2020 [102,214].
lected from clinical record, tele-monitoring or medical
tests but there are also a larger number of healthcare Variety inhealthcaredivulgesthatthereisagigan-
apps.Theseappshavetremendousamountofsubscrip- tic amount of healthcare record either it is structured,
tions. According to the Ericsson Mobility Report of unstructured or semi structured. There is a verity of
2018, in Q4 of 2017, there were a total of 7.8 billion unstructuredhealthcarerecordgenerateddailylikepa-
mobilesubscriptions,with53millionnewsubscriptions tientinformation,doctornotes,prescriptions,clinicalor
addedduringthequarterasthegrowthofpeopleonthis official medical records, images of MRI, CT and radio
planet subscribe new and valuable data about health films etc. Furthermore, structured and semi structured
and well-being everyday. These apps contain volumi- verity regarding to EMS and EHS comprises actuarial
nous data due to the world of social media. There are data, electronic apps and automated databases infor-
more than two billions people who use internet for the mation like physician name, hospital name, treatment
purpose of mailing, downloading, surfing, blogging and reimbursementcodes,patientname,addressetc.,infor-
entertainment etc. This amount of data also tend to mation of electronic billings and accounting and some
move towards the concept of big data. Fig. 1 depicts oftheclinicalandlaboratoryinstrumentreadingobser-
the ecosystem of healthcare assisted by big data and vations. For the conversion of unstructured data into
cloud computing approaches. structured data-sets, data analytics provides different
facilities; one of them is natural language processing in
Moving towards the five characteristics of big data
health fidelity.
inhealthcaresector,Volumereferstothemedicalrecord
ofpersonaldata,clinicaldata,radiologyimages,genet- Anotherimportantcharacteristicisvelocity thatcan
ics and population information, resource intensive ap- be at rest or motion pace. At rest velocity, healthcare
plications like 3D imaging genomics and biological se- recordencompassesdoctorornursenotes,scripts,docu-
quences. Likewise rapid increase in diseases and medi- mentaryfiles,rendersrecord,X-rayfilmsetc.Moreover,
cationsproduceexponentialgrowthofdatathatistobe medium velocity healthcare data includes blood pres-
stored,manipulateandmanaged.Fortheeffectivecap- sure readings, measurement of daily diabetic glucose
turing, management and manipulation of data, mod- by insulin pumps and EKGs etc. However, sometimes
erntechniqueslikeadvancesindatamanagement,cloud highvelocityisrequired,asitbecomeastapleoflifeor
computingandvisualizationetc.playavibrantrolefor death.Thistypeofdataembroilsonrealtimedatalike
healthcaresystems.Volumeisrapidlyincreasinginbio- monitoring of inside heart, anesthesia and trauma for
Leveraging BigDataAnalyticsinHealthcare Enhancement:Trends,ChallengesandOpportunities 3
bloodpressure,roomoperations,detectinginfectionsor enough to deal with them. Mostly the difficulties or
diseases like cancer etc. at early stage. challenges regarding to big data are how to capture,
Value describeshowmuchdataisbeneficialorhcare store, share and analyze data, how to visualize, update
ecosystem. For example raw data like paper prescrip- or query information privacy. From the view of Radar
tions, official record or patient information is less valu- [191],BigDatadealswiththehugeamountofdatathat
able than diagnostics record, medicines and laboratory is not fit into the conventional databases thus alterna-
instrumentsreadingrecord.Veracity tellsthereliability tivewayischosentoextractandprocessthedatafrom
or understandability of healthcare record that explains it. According to ZDNet 1 big data involves techniques
the capturing of diagnosis, procedures, treatments etc. and procedures for the creation, formation, manipula-
andtoverifyingtheinformationofpatient,hospitaland tion and organization of larger data-sets and facilities
reimbursement code etc. Different domains of health- offering for its storage. Techopedia 2 demarcatdes that
care and medical care propose in the literature. This unstructured large complex data that is processed by
reviewpaperdiscussesfivesub-disciplines(i.e.,medical massive parallelism on readily-available hardware be-
imageprocessingandimaginginformatics,bioinformat- cause relational database engines are unable to process
ics,clinicalinformatics,publichealthinformatics,med- that data. Literature divulges that big data is larger
ical signal analytics) that directly or indirectly involve data sets, enormous growth of data, massive data, un-
inhealthcareandbio-medical[213,211].Beforepresent- structured or complex data [242,77,45,100,80].
ing the literature review, we present the theoretical in- Basically main characteristics of big data are com-
formation of big data and data analytics in Section 2. plexityandmassivesize[202,21,22].However,bigdata
Different architectures of big data analytics deployed is deliberated by three characteristics known as 3Vs
inthedomainofhealthcareareexplaininginSection3. volume, variety and velocity [273,172,223]. Two addi-
We also present the advantages of big data to health- tional characteristics are extended to make 5Vs prop-
care in Section 4 that give the insights how healthcare erties of big data as depicted in Fig. 2. These addi-
can be improved by big data analytics. Then we move tional characteristics are value and veracity [77,230,
towards the literature review for which we have pro- 231].Volumeleadstothesizeorquantityofstoredand
posedareviewmethodologyfortheselectionofarticles generateddata.Whenthevolumeofdataislargeitbe-
explained in Section 5. Based on the review method- comes big data [169,168]. Variety is the type or nature
ology, the big data in five sub-disciplines of healthcare ofdatawhengroupedfromseveralsources.Dataisvar-
(i.e., medical image processing and imaging informat- ied in terms of format like CSV, text or Excel format
ics, bioinformatics, clinical informatics, public health in which data stored in a database. Likewise various
informatics, medical signal analytics) comprehensively forms of data also vary such as video, audio, SMS or
explaininSection6.Wealsosummarizeourmainfind- PDF data [168]. This verity is also one of the decisive
ings in Section 7. Then, Section 8 presents the notable characteristic of big data. Velocity specifies the speed
applications of healthcare analytics based on the main of data at which it is generated or processed. Value de-
findings. Section 9 discusses the challenges and open scribes how much data is beneficial or valuable. The
researchissues.FinallytheSection10drawsconclusion big data and the value is strongly co-related as stor-
of this paper. age of raw data is useless and inoperable. Huge data
is valuable due to the costs and benefits while collect-
ing and evaluating data [168]. The term veracity is the
2 Background of Big Data and Data Analytics
quality of data understand-ability. In other words reli-
ability, quality and accuracy of big data depend on the
The concept of big data was introduced in 1990’s by
veracity property because it prevents dirty data.
CoxandEllsworth[51],whentheyconsideredvisualiza-
Data analytics is the amalgamation of two words
tion as a Big Data problem. The significant academic
where data refers to raw facts, figures and information
references of big data in computer science was first dis-
andanalyticsmeansuseofseveraltoolstoanalyzedata
coveredbyWeissandIndurkhya[274].In2000,Diebold
althoughdataissmallorbig.Analyticsisacanopyand
[67]introducedbigdatainstatistics/econometricswhen
umbrella term for all data analysis applications [273].
theyreferredtoexploitedqualityinformation.Thecon-
The big data analytics is the process of analyzing large
cept was enriched by Douglas Laney at Gartner in an
voluminous data using different strategies. As afore-
unpublished2001research[155].Inshort,thetermBig
mentionedbigdataisintegratedfrommultiplesources,
data is attributed to Weiss and Indurkhya, Diebold,
andLaney.Bigdataisthenamegiventothelargerand
1 Http://www.zdnet.com/blog/virtualization/what-is-big-
enormous data-sets that are usually complex so that data/1708
traditional information processing techniques are not 2 Https://www.techopedia.com/definition/27745/big-data
4 ArshiaRehmanet al.
– Exploratory data analysis to examine the data cor-
pus to summarize their main characteristics.
– Descriptive modeling to segregating the data into
clusters based on their properties.
– Predictivemodelingtoforecastinginformationfrom
existing data.
– Discovering pattern to find patterns that occur fre-
quently.
– Content retrieval to discover hidden patterns.
Fig. 2 5V’sCharacteristicsofBig Data
Several techniques deploy for reduction, optimiza-
tionorregressionanalysisetc.forbigdata.Onaccount
of the voluminous amount of big data; its dimensional-
ity is reduced by linear mapping approaches like Prin-
thusbigdataanalyticsisusedtoexplorehowtoextract
cipalComponentAnalysis(PCA)[120],SingularValue
valuableandhiddenpatternsandconnectionsfromthis
Decomposition (SVD) [253]. Some non linear mapping
integrated data. In other words, big data analytics is
methodsfordimensonalityreductionareKernelPrinci-
simplyanalysisofdatawiththeintentionofextracting
palComponentAnalysis(KPCA)[234],Sammonsmap-
informationandsupportingconclusionmakingfromthe
ping [228,62],Laplacian eigenmaps [18].
inclusiveprocedureofscrutinizing,modeling,cleansing,
Mathematicaloptimizationisanotheranalyticstool
and transforming of Big data.
thatinvolvemulti-objectiveandmulti-modaloptimiza-
Data analytics can be analyzed by three general
tionapproacheslikeparetooptimization[195,121],evo-
methods: descriptive, predictive and prescriptive ana-
lutionaryalgorithms[64,11].Extractingmeaningfulin-
lytics [86,29]. Descriptive analytics deals with the con-
formationandclusterdevelopmentandanalysisisachieved
densation of big data into smaller meaningful informa-
by various clustering algorithms like Clustering LARge
tion.Predictiveanalyticsisthedatareductionanalytics
Applications (CLARA) [142] and Balanced Iterative
that predicts the future analysis by deploying a diver-
Reducing using Cluster Hierarchies (BIRCH) [289] etc.
sity of machine learning, statistical, modeling and data
mining techniques to study latest recent and historical
data. Prescriptive analytics is basically the predictive
analyticsthatisusedtotakeactionandmakethebusi- 3 Architectures For Big Data Analytics
ness decision.
Our anticipated general framework of big data analyt-
Mostextensivelyusedapproachesforpredictiveand
ics for healthcare is an abstraction of several concep-
descriptive analytics on big data are based on either
tual steps that describe the generic functionalities of
supervised, unsupervised, or hybrid machine learning.
the domain. The first step in the framework is data
An exponential time increase in data has made it dif-
collection, in which health and the clinical data is col-
ficult to extract valuable information from this data.
lected from internal or external sources. Verity of data
Despitethestrongperformanceoftraditionalmethods,
includes Electronic Healthcare Records (EHRs), clini-
their predictive power is limited as traditional analysis
calimagesandhealthmonitoringdeviceslogsetc.After
only deals with primary analysis whereas data analyt-
the collection of data, next step is Data processing in
icsdealswithsecondaryanalysis.Datamininginvolves
which healthcare data is stored, extract and load in
the digging or mining of data from many dimensions
thedatawarehouses,middle-wareorintraditionalfor-
or perspectives through data analysis tools to find pre-
mats like CSV, tables etc. Data transformation is the
viously unknown patterns and associations from data
next step in which data is transform, aggregate and
that may be used as valid information [215,186,210,
loaded in database file systems like Hadoop cloud or
185]. Moreover, it makes use of this extracted informa-
in a Hadoop distributed file systems (HDFS). Analyt-
tion to build predictive models. It has been deployed
ical phase is used to examine the big data using big
intensively and extensively by many organizations, es-
datatoolsandplatformslikeHadoop,Mapreduce,Hive,
pecially in the healthcare sector.
Hbase, Jaql, Avro and several others. Finally the out-
Dataminingisnotamagicalwandbutinfactabig putisgeneratedintheformofreportsandqueriesusing
powerful tool that does not discover solutions without dataminingandOLAPtools.Theselfexplanatorygen-
guidance. Data mining is convenient for the succeeding eral and conceptual architecture are depicted in Fig. 3
purposes: and Fig. 19.
Leveraging BigDataAnalyticsinHealthcare Enhancement:Trends,ChallengesandOpportunities 5
in the file system. It stores and maintains the files and
folders into a file system tree .The Data node is the
place where the real data is saved and handles.
3.2 MapReduce
MapreduceistheanothercornerstoneofApacheHadoop
thatisdevelopedin2004whenGooglepublishedathe-
sis [63]. MapReduce is a standard functional program-
ming model that process and analyze . It breaks task
into sub-tasks , gathering its outputs and analyze ef-
ficiently large datasets in parallel mode. Data analysis
and processing employed two steps namely, Map phase
and Reduce phase.
The architecture of MapReduce operation is split
Fig. 3 Conceptual Journey of Data to Information in Big
into three main components: Client, Job-Tracker and
DataAnalyticsEnvironment
Task-Tracker. Client submit its job to the Job-Tracker
in the form of JAR file. Job-Tracker maintains all the
jobs that are executed on the MapReduce thus act as
Basedonthedomainabstractionandidentification,
masterservice.Task-Trackerexecutesthejobsthatare
there are several definitions of big data architectures
assignedbyJob-Trackerthusactasslaveservice.Fig.8
proposedanddevelopedbyresearchersforbigdataan-
demonstrates the generic architecture of MapReduce
alytics.SometheimportantarchitecturesareHadhoop,
operation.
MapReduce [63], Streaming graph [248], Fault tolerant
graph etc. We present some of the renowned architec-
tures along with its core component comprehensively
3.3 Apache Hive
in detail. One of the major framework on Apache plat-
formisHadoopdevelopedbyDougCuttingandApache
ApacheHive[39]isaStructuredQueryLanguage(SQL)
Lucene. It is a collection of open-source software util-
based Extract Transform Load (ETL) and dataware
ities used for distributed computation, processing and
house on Hadoop plateform. It is a run time Hadoop
storageofhugedatasetsorbigdata.Twoarchitectures
provision framework that works on Hive Query Lan-
or core component of Hadoop are:
guage (HQL) that converts SQL queries into MapRe-
– Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) duce jobs. The main operations performed by Hive are
– MapReduce dataencapsulation,analyzing,adhocqueryingandsum-
Succeeding Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, depicts the core compo- marizing large data-sets. Apache Hive have four major
nents and basic framework Apache Hadoop. components: Hive Clients, Services, Processing frame-
work and Distributed Storage. Hive client like Thrift
Clients,JDBCClients,ODBCClientsetc.canbewrit-
3.1 Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) teninanysupportivelanguagelikeC++,Java,Python
etc.Services are used to perform queries. Services of
HDFS [244] is the master-slave architecture intended Hive may include command line interface (CLI), Web
to run on the commodity hardware. It provide great interface(WI),Hiveserver,driver,meta-storeetc.Queries
throughputaccesstoapplicationdata.Itallowstheun- are processed, executed and managed using internal
derlying storage for the Hadoop cluster and enhances HadoopMapReduceframework.Finallythedistributed
healthcare data analytics system by segregating huge data is deposited in HDFS. The core components are
expanse of data into smaller one and disseminated it revealed in Fig. 9.
acrossvariousservers/nodes.ThearchitectureofHDFS
isdividedintoName-nodeandData-nodewhereName-
node is master and Data node is slave. Documents are 3.4 Apache HBase
storedinthedatanodehavingsizeof64Mthatcannot
bechanged.FollowingFig.7illustratesthearchitecture Apache HBase works on non-SQL and non-relational
of HDFS. According to Fig. 7, Client is a HDFS user. approach.Itisadatabasemanagementapproachusing
Name-node is responsible to manage the name space column oriented structure lies on the top of HDFS. It
6 ArshiaRehmanet al.
Fig. 4 ArchitectureofBigDataAnalyticsPlatform
Fig. 5 CoreComponentsofHadoop
Fig. 7 ArchitectureofHDFS
Fig. 8 MapReduceArchitecture
Fig. 6 FrameworkofHadoop
themaincomponentthatmanagesandmonitorsHBase
RegionServers,performdatabaseoperationsusingDDL
used the key/value data that perform read/write oper- to create, update and delete tables. Hbase tables are
ations on large HDFS database. Apache Hbase is cat- divided into several regions that are manage, handle
egorized into three main components: HMaster Server, and execute operations through Hbase Region Servers.
HBaseRegionServer,andZookeeper.HMasterServeris Hbase is a distributed system that is coordinate by
Leveraging BigDataAnalyticsinHealthcare Enhancement:Trends,ChallengesandOpportunities 7
Fig. 9 HiveArchitecture
Fig. 11 PrestoArchitecture
Zookeeper. The components of Apache HBase are de-
picted in Fig. 10. onHadoopplatformlikeapplicationsofdistributedand
accessible machine learning algorithms.
3.7 Avro
Avro assists serialization and data encoding that ad-
vancesstructureofdatabyidentifyingdatatypes,mean-
ing and scheme. It has the functionalities of serializa-
tionandversioningcontrolfeatures.Avroconfiguration
is illustrated from the Fig. 12.
Fig. 10 HbaseArchitecture
3.5 Presto
Presto is a distributed structured query language en-
gine that is used to analyzed the large amount of data
ranging from in size from gigabytes to petabytes. The
architecture of Presto is composed of coordinators and
workers.UserqueriesaresubmittedtotheCoordinator
that is accountable for planning, executing, scheduling
Fig. 12 AvroArchitecture
and parsing the queries of Workers. The architecture is
explained from the succeeding Fig. 11.
3.6 Mahout 4 Advantages of Big Data to Healthcare
Mahout is an apache scheme, objective is to produce Howbigdataanalyticscanimprovehealthcare?Simple
unrestrictedapplicationsofdisseminatedandaccessible answer to this question is: Analyzing big data can aid
machine learning algorithms that supports healthcare healthcare stakeholders to deliver efficient procedures
data analytics on Hadoop systems. It is designed to and insights into the patients and their health. Numer-
supportbigdataanalyticsthatprovidefreeapplication ous benefits can be obtained with big data analytics.
8 ArshiaRehmanet al.
Main source of healthcare data are: EHR (Electronic and insights by exploring large data-sets. Scientists are
Health Records), LIMS (Laboratory Information Man- banking on big data to discover the cure for cancer.
agement system), Pharmacy, MDI (Monitoring and di- Cost: Healthcare cost can be cut down by analyz-
agnostic instruments), Finance (Insurance claim and ingbiddatai.e.predictiveanalyticscanhelpstodetect
billing) and hospital resources. With the advancement diseaseatearlystage.Moreover,bigdataalsoreliefsin
of data acquisition devices and analytics techniques, reducing medication errors by advancing economic and
data source are getting enriched with newer forms of administrative performance, and reduce re-admissions.
data i.e. hospitals start to collect Genetic information For example, patient groups effected by a disease and
in EHR as well. Within this vast variety of patient are treated with different drug regimens can be com-
data lies the valuable insights for both patient as well pared to determine which treatment plans work best
as organizations, which, when applied judiciously can for the same of similar disease which result in saving
bring in wonderful results. Potential benefits includes resources and money.
advanced patient care: Finding diseases cure: A particular medication
seems to work for a few people but not for others, and
Quality of Care: EHR helps in assembling de-
there are numerous things to be discovered in a sin-
mographic and medical data such as clinical data, lab
gle genome. It isn’t feasible to observe all of them in
test, diagnoses, and medical conditions. By discovering
element. however big statistics can help in uncovering
associationsandpatternswithinthisdata,helpshealth-
unknowncorrelations,hiddenstyles,andinsightsbyus-
carepractitionerstoprovidequalitycare,savelivesand
ing analyzing large sets of statistics. through applying
lower costs.
machine getting to know, big facts can have a look at
Disease Prevention: Spending more on health
human genomes and find the correct remedy or drugs
doesnotguaranteehealthsystemefficiency.Theinvest-
to deal with cancer.
ment in prevention can help to reduce the cost as well
asimprovehealthqualityandefficiency.Healthsystems
face considerable challenges in endorsing and protect-
5 Review Methodology
ing health at a time when the burden on finances and
resources is substantial in many countries. The early
The review methodology is the systematic process of
detectionandpreventionofdiseaseplaysaveryimpor-
finding the relevant literature from different sources.
tantroleinreducingdeathsaswellashealthcarecosts.
The main objectives of review methodology are:
Thus, the core question are: How can we diminish the
level of ill health in the population? And how can we – To deploy the definitions and concepts of Big data
prevent the disease to occur based on early symptoms in healthcare.
of patient? – To explore the five sub-disciplines (i.e., medical im-
age processing and imaging informatics, bioinfor-
Efficiency: Managinghealthcaredatausingtradi-
matics, clinical informatics, public health informat-
tional analytical tools is nearly impossible due to the
ics, medical signal analytics [208,215]) that directly
diversity and volume of data. Healthcare stakeholders
or indirectly involve in healthcare and bio-medical.
usebigdataasapartoftheirbusinessintelligencestrat-
– To illustrate the repositories and complex datasets
egy to examine historical patient admission rates and
of five sub disciplines.
to analyze staff efficiency.
– To determine the big data analytical architectures
DiseaseCureness:Healthcarepracticeshavelargely
and techniques in healthcare.
beenreactivewherethepatienthastowaituntiltheon-
– Todiscussthepotentialadvantagesandapplications
setofdiseaseafterwhichtreatmentisprescribedwhich
of big data in healthcare.
hopefully leads to a cure.However, no two persons in
– To present the open challenges and research issues
the world would have the same in genetic sequence.
ofbigdatainhealthcareandthestrategiestackling
Furthermore,environmentalfactorsassociatedwiththe
the challenges facing in the domain.
onsetofthediseasearenotknown.,whichisthemotive
why particular medication seems to work for few peo- he main steps of review methodology are informa-
plebutnotforothers.Sincetherearemillionsofthings tionsources,selectioncriteria,andsearchandselection
to be considered in a single genome, it is almost im- procedure. Information Sources: The first step in the
possible to study them comprehensively. On the other systematic process of research methodology is to col-
hand, big data in healthcare have been revolutioniz- lecttherelevantarticles.Tosearchtherelevantarticles
ingtheexpanseofgenomicsmedicine.Bigdataanalyt- we used Google Scholar. We scanned the references to
ics can extract hidden patterns, unknown correlations, presentathoroughreview.SelectionCriteria:Insecond