The Appliance Pervasive of Internet of Things in Healthcare Systems Mir Sajjad Hussain Talpur School of Information Science & Engineering, Central South University (CSU), 410083 - Changsha, China.
mirsajjadhussain@gmail.com Abstract In fact, information systems are the foundation of new about a tagged patient or medical object by browsing an productivity sources, medical organizational forms, and erection Internet address or database entry that corresponds to a of a global economy. Io T based healthcare systems play a particular Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) tag. But significant role in ICT and have contribution in growth of now, it is extended to the general idea of medical things, medical information systems, which are underpinning of recent especially healthcare everyday objects, those are readable, medical and economic development strategies. However, to take advantages of Io T, it is essential that medical enterprises and recognizable, locatable, addressable, and/or controllable.
community should trust the Io T systems in terms of These objects may be equipped with devices such as performance, security, privacy, reliability and return-on- sensors, actuators, and RFID tags, in order to allow investment, which are open challenges of current Io T systems. patients, doctors, equipments and other healthcare actors to For heightening of healthcare system; tracking, tracing and be connected anytime and anywhere with anything and monitoring of patients and medical objects are more essential.
anyone.
But due to the inadequate healthcare situation, medical environment, medical technologies and the unique requirements of some healthcare applications, the obtainable tools cannot meet them accurately. The tracking, tracing and monitoring of patients and healthcare actors activities in healthcare system are challenging research directions for Io T researchers. State-of-theart Io T based healthcare system should be developed which ensure the safety of patients and other healthcare activities. With this manuscript, we elaborate the essential role of Io T in healthcare systems; immense prospects of Internet of things in healthcare systems; extensive aspect of the use of Io T is dissimilar among different healthcare components and finally the participation of Io T between the useful research and present realistic applications. Io T and few other modern technologies are still in underpinning stage; mainly in the healthcare system.
Keywords: Internet of Things (Io T); Health Care Systems (HCS); Aspects; Quality; Regulations; Principles; Traceability; Tagging; Sensing.
1. Introduction Fig 1. Io T modeled Healthcare Actors Interactions In healthcare industry, Internet of Things (Io T) provides an opportunity of discovering healthcare information Through the medical object-to-person and object-to-object communications, Io T enables a wide range of smart applications and services to cope with many of the challenges that individuals and organizations face in their management system has become one of key areas. The Io T everyday lives, such as smart healthcare, smart home, is a key technology that is quickly gaining ground in the smart earth, smart kitchen, smart transportation and smart development of modern secure wireless communications.
office, etc. Io T is not a simple extension of the Internet or an aggregation of Internet systems, and it covers a wide Tracking/ Sensing Identification Real time range of technologies including tagging, sensing, Tracing and data authentication collection networking, computing, storage, and control, which Patients Intelligent Protecting Automatic together build feasible complex cybernetic physical and tracking medication patient privacy data social systems to support these smart applications [1], [2].
and tracing monitoring collection and Internet of things has dynamic capabilities to connect D 2 M at hospitals (pregnant transfer is (Device-to-Machine), O 2 O (Object-to-Object), P 2 D and outside women or mostly aimed (Patient-to-Doctor), P 2 M (Patient-to-Machine), D 2 M to monitor elderly) at at reducing (Doctor-to-Machine), S 2 M (Sensor-to-Mobile), M 2 H the patient home or form (Mobile-to-Human), T 2 R(Tag-to-Reader), intelligently flow hospital processing connects humans, machines, smart devices, and dynamic time, process automation.
systems which ensure the effective healthcare system, Tracking of home Patient Automated health monitoring system, medical assets monitoring and patient identification care and medical waste management system[3].
location to reduce procedure harmful auditing, and Medical has ever remained one of the major applications incidents medical of internet. The collaboration of internet and medical information formed a sub-field e-health. An application of Internet and management.
other related technologies in healthcare industry to Tracking of Sensing will Eliminate Relates to improve the access, efficiency, effectiveness, quality of drugs, be able to do wrong integrating clinical and business processes utilized by healthcare supplies real time patient/wrong IOT, RFID and monitoring surgery technology organizations, practitioners, patients in an effort to procedures of patients. with other improve the health status of patients [4]. Along with many performed Parameters health other services, online appointment services in particular on patient such as information are the most common e-health services [3]. E-health is one blood and clinical of small component of Io T based healthcare management pressure, application system, in which an online interaction of a patient to a glucose technologies.
doctor is made possible and easy along with easy access to levels, heart online healthcare record checking for the patients. and Whereas Io T based healthcare system consists all this plus breathing rate identification and tracking of patients and doctors Accounting Sensor Patient Integrating locations, tracking of patient’s health records and tracking patient time devices identification state-of-thelocations of hospital equipment etc. Io T have also enabled in enable to avoid wrong art intelligent behavior of some equipment which alarm emergency function drug, dose, physiological automatically when near to expiry or auto informing a department centered on time, parameters relevant doctor if concerned patient is brought to Intensive patients, and procedure monitoring Care Unit. “Patients and medical objects tracking, tracing in particular time interval and monitoring are demanded by world wide healthcare on in order to institutions, governments and other organizations, the diagnosing determine patient actual time universal expectation of all healthcare organizations conditions, period.
wants state-of-the-art patients tracking system, has put providing endorse superior requirements” [5]. In order to enhance real-time the protection of patients, improve the healthcare system information and make them competitiveness of patient care, must on patient develop an effective patient traceability system, health traceability system of patients care should have dynamic indicators and efficient management of the healthcare system [6]. Table.1. Potential of Io T in Healthcare System Therefore, it has immense challenge for researcher or The main idea of this thought is the pervasive existence developer how to use information and communication around us of a mixture of stuff or substance; such as technology; so the implementation of healthcare Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) tags, EPC technology, tiny sensors, actuators, smart phones, and so on. These things are capable to interact with each other and collaborate with their neighbors through the unique addressing schemes, in order to achieve their goals [7, 8].
In healthcare industry, Io T is applied for patient tracking by offering intelligent jackets, wristbands containing RFID tags. The tags interact with hospital information system for automating administrative tasks like patient admissions, patient transfers and discharges. “The U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have recently approved a tag called “veri-chip” in humans. These tags facilitate disoriented, elderly patients more safe by storing a detailed health information record. With this FDA approval in the headlines, suppliers have begun to offer patient wristbands containing tags” [3]. Even Fig 2. Basic composition diagram of Io T though Io T`s application in patients tracking is less talked Indisputably, the primary means of medical data gathering about, serious situations could be avoided for any Radio frequency identification deployment and it implementing RFID tags to specific patients atleast, think consists of savant server, Object naming service servers, the severity of this incident that occurred in phoenix Physical Markup Language server and the corresponding recently to emphasize the importance in use of RFID tags, medical data server software [11]. Internet system consists when a patient with dementia wandered from his / her of state-of-the-art computer systems and secure network room was found in the storage area, after 3 consecutive servers as shown figure 2.Vision of healthcare technology days.
mainly rely on accurate patient recognition in reducing healthcare complications, errors and harmful drug effects.
2. The Structure of Io T The emboldens of Io T technologies in healthcare will Through the Internet of things, anything in the healthcare ensure the healthcare safety, exact patient, accurate drug, system can be identified tracked and monitored on demand proper dose, right way and exact time, by complying with anytime anywhere [1]. Internet of things is considered as the principles and regulations of HIPAA (Health Insurance remarkable revolution after the blooming of Internet with Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) which ICT based industry. Internet of things has three basic mentions the standards of data exchange with protection components, namely RFID systems, middleware systems and confidentiality of patient information, JCAHO (Joint and Internet systems Savant. RFID system is one of the Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations major components of IOT and it enables data to be that emphasizes positive patient identification) and AHA transmitted by a portable device, called “a tag”, which is (American Hospital Association) stressing guidelines for read by an RFID reader and processed according to the tamper proof non-transferable wristband minimizing the needs of a particular application [9]. The data transmitted risk of losing transferred data. The Internet of Things(Io T) by the tag may provide identification or location system in patient tracking provides non-transferable information, or specifics about the patient tagged, such as accurate patient identification which will ensure the safety (e.g. patient ID, age, sex, blood pressure, glucose level) of patient and reduced the harmful incidents in healthcare therefore the RFID systems can be used to monitor system, The Io T will improve efficiency of healthcare healthcare objects in real-time, without the need of being system, introduces affordable low cost RFID tags and tiny in line-of-sight. This allows mapping of real world sensors which are associated to medical devices to reduce healthcare system into the virtual world system. service costs, improve the quality of service, control the Middleware savant system is software that bridges RFID medical defects, improve identification and authentication hardware and healthcare applications [10]. of patients, automatic data collection and sensing system [12].Io T has vision to swagger the healthcare based smart communication technologies in order to connect the healthcare actors anywhere and anytime. That is why; Internet of Things played an exigent role in healthcare system.
3. Functioning Philosophy of Io T System a higher, in time, need to be quicker, in space, and requires more strict storage conditions. Therefore, it made healthcare traceability an advanced technical requirement, Internet of Things is a technological revolution that while the development and stability of the healthcare represents the future of computing and communications, system made a greater requirement [11].All nodes in and its development depends on dynamic technical healthcare system should be a integrated, harmonious innovation in a number of important fields, from wireless division of medical staff and cooperation, and layout of the sensors to nanotechnology [1]. The essential functioning traditional healthcare system is comparatively complex, principles of Internet of things based on Radio Frequency healthcare actors activities relatively unstable and so the Identification which is known as the soul of Io T, EPC delay caused by the healthcare organizations and technology used global unified products coding and asymmetric information, splits the chain between wireless communications technology in order to tracing of healthcare actors and enterprise [13]. It can be seen that healthcare objects, swank integrity of healthcare system the traditional healthcare system are often in motion or [13,14]. Medical products, labeled with EPC code stored loose state of the information, timeliness, accuracy, and electronic tags. Furthermore, in the whole life cycle of the sharing, based on EPC technology, the application of medical product; the EPC code easily recognizes a medical medical things; a good solution to the above problem. An product, as EPC codes for the index in real-time query and EPC have tag read and write data function, easy modify medical objects information from the healthcare compactness and diversification of the shape, reusable, network, but also use it as signs, all movement in the good penetration and data capacity and other healthcare system to find the medical product tracking. characteristics, can adapt to frequent changes in the Entire healthcare actors are connected with RFID tags, healthcare information system, communicate data, when a RFID reader read range in its tags to monitor the acquisition in a timely manner and system commands, existence, the label contained in the EPC and its linked widely used in medical products warehouse management, data transfer to the savant middleware [10]. Initially the hospital transportation management, medical production electronic medical product code data is key; in the local management. Healthcare actors tracking, identification and Object naming server (ONS) contains the information of significantly reduces the health complications [13].
medical product for EPC information server's network Therefore, Io T application for healthcare, the use of RFID address, and savant query. According to the EPC and secure databases will integrate all types of medical information server address, access to medical commodity production, movement and the effective information specific information, the essential cure, to transmit the quality and protection [15]. Medical information information back-end healthcare applications to do a collection, storage, transmission, the healthcare system and deeper level of computing ,at the same time, local EPC safety of healthcare actors combined through the entire information server and source of this information server to system, and established healthcare actors traceable system record the reader to read and modify the corresponding based on Io T. Which archive a summary of the medical information. data and information in the entire healthcare system to make regulatory and patient information track in the 4. Networking Structure of Healthcare platform, and guarantee transparency throughout the healthcare system process [16].
System B. Brunt of Internet of things on Healthcare System A. Healthcare Activities Analysis on the basis of Io T The brunt of patient identification and medical objects identification processes in healthcare system for instance: Healthcare system is the organization of citizens, medical patient`s identification to reduce harmful incidents to institutions, and healthcare resources to deliver healthcare patients (e.g. wrong drug/dose/time etc). Relation to staff, services to meet the health needs of citizens [8].The identification and authentication are most frequently used healthcare system has been overwhelmed by problems such to grant access and to improve employee morale by as patient diagnoses being written illegitimately on paper, addressing patient safety issues. In relation to assets, doctors not being able to easily access patient information, identification and authentication is predominantly used to and limitations on time, space, and personnel for meet the requirements of security procedures, to avoid monitoring patients. With advancements in technology, thefts or losses of important instruments and products, so opportunities exist to improve the current state of in tracking and identification of patients, healthcare staff healthcare to minimize some of these problems and identification and medical assets identification. In the provide more personalized service. Because characteristics entire system, the main objective of Io T is to manage the of healthcare system, information flow is necessary to pass identification process of healthcare actors [8]. RFID tags Acknowledgment and tiny sensors are attached to patients and patients also wear bracelet and it has unique identification number of This work is supported by National Natural Science RFID tag, which process and record all relevant Foundation (NSF) of Peoples Republic of China under information collected on the birth, at the same time, grant numbers 61073037 and 61103035, Ministry of applied RFID chip, tiny sensor in order to manage patients’ Education fund for doctoral disciplines in Higher medical information, assets and other healthcare actors’ Education under the grant number of 20110162110043.
information. The authors are thankful to the Ministry of Education for the financial support.
5. Intensification Necessitate in Health References Monitoring System for Quality of Service [1] Internet of Things in 2020: Roadmap for the future. (May, Internet of things provides an effective way of real time 2008)Retrievedfrom:http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/ remote monitoring system of healthcare actors through policy/rfid/documents/iotprague 2009.pdf.
RFID tags, sensors, and actuators. The RFID tags in [2] D. Giusto, A. Iera, G. Morabito, L. Atzori (Eds.), The healthcare may be applied to patients, assets, medical staff Internet of Things, Springer, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-4419-1673 and other objects, allowing the readers on gate frames, 0. Italy.
hospital wards and other treatment areas of hospital to [3] CERP-Io T – Cluster of European Research Projects Vision and Challenges for Realising the Internet of Things March detect and record interactions. Io T is applied for patient 2010.
tracking by offering wristbands containing RFID tags. The [4] IERC(2010) Vision and challenges for realiazing the Internet tags interact with healthcare information system for of things. IERC cluster book. March 2010.
automating managerial everyday tasks like patients’ [5] Io T-A(2010) FP 7 IP Internet of Things Architecture, admissions, transfers and discharges [17], [18].
online:http://www.iot-a.eu.
Io T applications in medical administration to streamline [6] Zhang Yingfu, The Technology and Application of The the processes and reduce healthcare harmful incidents the Internet of Things [J].Communication & Information above arguments prove that Internet of things ensure the Technology, 20 10(01)5 1-53.
safety of patients and quality of service. [7] He Ke, The Key Technologies of l OT with Development & Applications [J]. Radio Frequency Ubiquitous Journal, 20 10(0 1)32-35.
[8] Internet of Things P 7_TA (2010)0207 European Parliament 6. Conclusion resolution of 15 June 2010 on the Internet of Things (2009/2224(INI)) (2011/C 236 E/04).
The name, Internet of Things, is syntactically composed of [9] National Intelligence Council. Disruptive Civil Technologiestwo terms, Internet and Things. As a result, it’s usually Six technologies with potential impacts on US Interests out considered that there are two versions of Io T, “Internet to 2025. Conference Report CR 2008-07. Apr. 2008.
[10] M. Botterman, for the European Commission Information oriented” or “Things oriented”. The “Things oriented” Society & Media Directorate General, Networked Enterprise version focus on the technology developed to improve & RFID Unit, D 4, Internet of Things: An Early Reality of the object visibility, such as awareness of its status, current Future Internet, Report of the Internet of Things Workshop, location. This is undoubtedly a key component of the path Prague, Czech Republic, May 2009.
to the full deployment of the Io T vision but it’s not only [11] M. Evered, S. Bogeholz, A Case Study in Access Control one [19]. In past decades, the Internet has connected Requirements for a Health Information System, Australasian numerous devices. Why don’t we take advantage of the Information Security Workshop, 2004.
existing Internet technology and connect smart objects [12] Lu Wenjun, “Io T makes the City Smarter,” Science and around the world? [13]. We discussed the significance of Culture, Vol 10, pp. 12-13, October 2010.
[13] Yang Zhen. “The development of the Internet of Things,” Io T especially in healthcare system; immense prospects of Journal of Nanjing University of Posts and Internet of things in HCS; extensive aspect of the use of Telecommunications(Social Science). Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 8 Io T is dissimilar among different healthcare components 9, June 2010.
and finally the participation of Io T between the useful [14] Rolf H. Weber, “Privacy Regulations in the Internet of research and present realistic applications. Io T and few Things”, Law and Technology Centre University of Hong other advance technologies are still in underpinning stage; Kong, January 24, 2011.
mainly in the healthcare system. This article tries to [15] J. Marconi, “E-Health: Navigating the Internet for Health emphasize a healthcare system not only to realize the information Healthcare”, Advocacy White Paper. Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, 2003 May 5.
illustration and traceability of healthcare actors guarantee pp. 1-6.
the quality but also effectively controls healthcare actors.
[16] O. Rienhoff, Integrated Circuit Health Data Cards (Smart Cards): A Primer for Health Professionals. Washington, DC: PAHO, 2003. pp. 560-565.USA.
[17] Alsinet, T. et al.: Automated monitoring of medical protocols: a secure and distributed architecture, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume: 27, pp. 367-392. (2003).
[18] Cortes, Ulises et al.: Intelligent Healthcare Managing: An assistive Technology Approach, IWANN 2007, LNCS, pp.
1045-1051 (2007).Canada.
First Author: Mir Sajjad Hussain Talpur received master`s degree in Information Technology from Shah Abdul Latif University Khairpur mirs, Pakistan in 2003.He is currently a Doctoral Degree Candidate at the Trusted Computing Institute, School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan China. He is also a Lecturer at the Information Technology Institute, Sindh Agriculture University, Sindh Pakistan.
His current research interests include Internet of Things in Healthcare System.