The 7 th International Conference on the Theory Diagrams are very wide-ranging and open-ended representations that include sketches, drawings, charts, pictures, 2 D and 3 D geometric models, and maps. Diagrams are a vital tool in human communication in areas such as art and science, as well as commerce and industry. Increased understanding of how effective diagrams can be generated and used has the potential to produce transformative advances in these areas. Research topics include understanding diagrammatic reasoning in humans; understanding the use of diagrammatic representation for communication; developing techniques for automated diagrammatic reasoning; and designing tools for use of diagrammatic representations.
The goal of the Diagrams 2012 Graduate Symposium is twofold. Firstly, the Symposium will provide senior graduate students and recent graduates with the opportunity to present their research and receive feedback from established researchers who will provide comments on each of the presentations. Secondly, the Symposium will provide students with an opportunity to network with each other as future colleagues. The doctoral student symposium will increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student researchers in these areas, and train them by providing early input and feedback from senior researchers in the field in an interactive and constructive environment.
Organising Committee General Chair Peter Rodgers (University of Kent, UK) Joint Program Chairs Phil Cox (Dalhousie University, Canada) Beryl Plimmer (University of Auckland, NZ) Tutorials Chair Gem Stapleton (University of Brighton, UK) Workshops Chair Nathaniel Miller (University of Northern Colorado, USA) Graduate Symposium Chair Lisa Best (The University of New Brunswick, Canada) Publicity Chair Aidan Delaney (University of Brighton, UK) 2 Table of Contents 1) Ozge Alacam……………………………………………………………………………………..5 Work in Progress: Annotating Gestures in Communication through Graphs 2) Farrukh Arslan Purdue University, USA) ……………………………………………8 Classification Tree Diagrams in Health Informatics Applications 3) Andrew Blake (University of Brighton, UK)………………………………………..11 What Makes an Effective Euler Diagram?
4) Luke Mac Neill (University of New Brunswick, Canada)……………………….14 The Serial Colour (SECO) Profile : A Colour Based Form of Graphical Representation 5) Gorkem Pacaci (Uppsala University, Sweden)…………………………………….17 Towards a visual compositional relational programming methodology 6) Alistair Stead (University of Cambridge, UK)……………………………………..20 A Sketch Recogniser as a Virtual Machine 8) Peter Vivian (Coventry University, UK)……………………………………………..23 Enhanced vector diagrams for illustrating elementary mechanics 4 Work in Progress: Annotating Gestures in Communication through Graphs Özge Alaçam, Cengiz Acartürk Cognitive Science Program, Informatics Institute, Middle East Technical University, 06800, Ankara/Turkey {ozge.alacam, acarturk}@metu.edu.tr Abstract. This work in progress study presents a syntactic-level analysis of gestures in communication through annotated line graphs in time domain. As distinct from the gesture analysis at discourse level, the syntactic gesture analysis is based on solely physical properties of the gestures, such as direction, size or position. The results revealed strong relationship between gestures, verbal descriptions and graphical annotations.
Keywords. Multimodal communication, syntactic gesture annotation, graph gesture interaction 1 Introduction Graphs and diagrammatic representations are widely used means of visual communication. In addition to graphical representations, communication is also achieved by the contribution of other modalities, such as gestures. For annotating gestures, one of the mostly preferred methods in the literature is proposed by Mc Neil and Levy [1]. According to this method, there are four main categories of gestures: beats, deictic, iconic and metaphoric. However, depending on the context, one gesture can belong to more than one category, and this complicates the coding procedure thus increasing the subjectivity. In order to address this issue, Mc Neill emphasized another method called “Dimensional Framework” [1], which claims that each gesture may have loading for each gesture property. So, a gesture can be multidimensional and the saliency of the dimensions is of the interest. Moreover, adding syntactic level of analysis prior to discourse analysis mentioned above is another method for gesture annotation. At the syntactic level, gestures are analyzed according to their physical properties, such as direction and size. However, gesture and spoken language are distinct forms of communication and these methods are generally engineered for the purpose of gesture-language interaction analysis. On the other hand, the analysis method for gesture–graph interaction should benefit from the shared physical properties based on spatial information carried by both modalities. One of the studies, in which this method (syntactic and discourse level analysis respectively) is employed, was conducted by Acarturk and Alacam [2]. The secondary results of the study indicated that for the evaluation of gesture - graph interaction, the syntactic level seems more informative than the discourse-level analysis that suffers from ambiguity. Regarding this issue, our research interest is to investigate whether a significant relationship can be obtained between the information conveyed in different modalities. The analysis has been performed at a syntactic level based on solely physical properties of gestures.
2 Pilot Study Seven participants (university students or teaching assistants) participated in the study. The experiment was conducted in the native language of all the participants (Turkish). The participants were asked to present single-sentence verbal descriptions of annotated graphs to a hypothetical audience. Participants’ spontaneous gestures for 14 annotated population-graphs of bird species 5 were video-recorded. Three types of annotations were used: process annotation, durative state annotation and punctual state annotation (Fig.1).
Fig. 1. Sample annotated graphs with a process annotation (left), a punctual state annotation (middle), and a durative state annotation (right) Syntactic Gesture Annotation. The coding scheme based on syntactic features was employed by using The Noldus Observer XT. Each gesture was classified in terms of its directionality: no direction, vertical/diagonal, horizontal, or other. Then the coder identified the following features of each gesture: size, palm direction, speed and start position. In the present study, we focus on directionality of the gestures by leaving the analysis of other features to a further study.
Spoken Language Transcription. The sentences produced by the participants were transcribed and then the parts of the sentences with accompanying gestures were segmented into phrases. After this process, the phrases were classified into five categories: time, state, process, durative and other. The time category covers phrases with temporal information, such as “between 1990 and 2010”. The phrases that refer to particular information in the graph, such as a peak, were classified as state. The verbs or nouns that point out the change in the population, such as an increase or a decrease formed the process category., The durative category covers the verbs or nouns that refer a stable duration in population. Finally, the remaining phrases, such as the species of the bird or their location were evaluated under the other category.
3 Findings The interactions between the pairs of modalities were analyzed separately and Mc Nemar tests were conducted to investigate the relationships. The syntactic analysis of the gestures based on physical features revealed significant associations with other modalities. Table 1 presents a cooccurrence matrix for three-way interaction between the modalities.
6 Conclusion 4 The results point out that durative graphical annotations yield more horizontal gestures and the utterance of the words like “being stable”. On the other hand, more vertical/diagonal movements were produced by the participants when describing graphs with process annotations. Additionally, the co-occurrence matrix reveals that verbal descriptions that refer to time or to population, which are accompanied by punctual annotations, are usually not accompanied by directional gestures. These results reveal that syntactic-level analysis of annotations is promising in revealing the interactions between language, gesture and graphical annotations. We state that the annotation method that focuses on syntactic features is not trivial, due to their possible contribution in corpus design regarding gesture modality. In addition, it may also have an important role in decreasing the subjectivity in coding process, since the syntactic features consist of discrete categories that reduce the level of ambiguity for spatial information.
5 References 1. Mc Neill, D.: Gesture and thought: University of Chicago Press. (2005).
2. Acarturk, C., Alacam, O.: Gestures in communication through line graphs. Proceedings of the 34 th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Sapporo, Japan: Cognitive Science Society. (to appear) 7 Classification Tree Diagrams in Health Informatics Applications Farrukh Arslan Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA farslan@purdue.edu Abstract. Health informatics deal with the methods used to optimize the acquisition, storage and retrieval of medical data, and classify information in health-care applications. Healthcare analysts are particularly interested in various computer informatics areas such as; knowledge representation from data, anomaly detection, outbreak detection methods and syndromic surveillance applications. Although various parametric and non-parametric approaches are being proposed to classify information from data, classification tree diagrams provide an interactive visualization to analysts as compared to other methods. In this work we discuss application of classification tree diagrams to classify information from medical data in healthcare applications.
Keywords: classification tree, anomaly detection, knowledge representation 1 Introduction Medical data in health informatics applications contains patient locations, temporal component (patient’s date of visit), syndrome classifications to various categories by ICD codes for time series analysis. Data also comprises age and gender of the individuals and text-field collected patient complaints for outbreak assessment [1]. Domain experts and healthcare analysts are often interested to classify information from medical data for further analysis and exploration. By analyzing extracted information from data, high incidence of events, anomalies or hotspots can be detected and mitigative measures can be taken for prevention.
Most information extraction methods rely on either parametric statistical formulation such as change-point or non-statistical formulation such as decision or classification tree [2]. The decision tree classifiers are constructed for datasets by using the training data over relatively long timeframes. In a decision tree, each internal node involves some test on one or more attributes, while the leaf nodes provide the potential decision information. Traversing the tree from the root to each leaf node, relevant information patterns can be identified and further analyzed by domain experts.
Classification tree diagrams are simple to interpret by domain experts and provide information visualization. Classifications are robust in a sense that there is no assumption made about underlying distribution of data and aprior distribution needs not to be known before building a classification tree diagram.
2 Medical Data in Health Informatics Emergency department data can be used for evaluating algorithms and methods, analyzing multivariate patterns and attribute relationships thereby extracting useful information. Medical data, stored in a relational database is shown in table 1. This data comprises chief complaints which are noted at the emergency department prior to the patient seeing a doctor. Relational medical database also includes patient’s home addresses (longitude, latitude) and demographic attributes (age, 8 gender).
Table 1. Medical dataset stored in a relational database. Following HIPPA regulations, patient and hospital names have been replaced by ID’s. Patient’s address is represented by longitude and latitude.
3 Classification Tree Diagram Induction A classification tree diagram [2] represents a structured binary tree which performs a split test in its internal nodes based on some or more attribute values and predicts decision in its leaf node.
Classification trees are built by recursive partitioning. The ultimate goal of classification tree induction algorithm is to end up with the smallest tree and purest leaf nodes i.e. further splitting would not increase information gain. The goal of building a classification tree structure is to have leaf nodes where all the attributes in it are correctly classified, maximizing the information gain.
Each leaf node in a tree is associated with a class. In anomaly detection methods [3], this would indicate if and where an anomaly is present in the dataset while traversing from root. Anomalies that are addressed by classification trees are the patterns in data that do not conform to normal semantic relationships between attributes. Each non-terminal node is associated with one of the attributes that domain rules possess. Each branch is associated with a particular value that the attribute of its parent node can take in dataset. Attribute discrimination is done by calculating Information gain and Entropy.
If an experiment has n possible outcomes then the amount of information I, expressed as bits is defined to be entropy, where pi is the prior probability of the ith outcome. The information gain for an attribute ‘A’ when used with a set of domain rules X is given below.
Tree diagram resulting from data classification is shown in figure 1. Gender and age attributes shows semantic relationships with complaints/syndromes. For example, elevated blood pressure complaint is related to age factor greater than 35 and elevated blood sugar with age between 11 and 17. Such semantic patterns would be of particular interest for healthcare analysts while exploring records for outbreak assessment. As a future work diagrams can be extended for multiclass knowledge extraction with spatio-temporal patterns spanning over multiple domains.
9 Fig. 1. Diagram shows age/gender based attributes classification from medical data. Traversing the tree from the root to each leaf node, semantic patterns can be analyzed.
4 Future Work Classification trees diagrams can be further extended to explore temporal anomalies in time series data, spanning over multiple spatio-temporal domains.
5 References 1. Maciejewski, R., Hafen, R., Rudolph, S., Tebbetts, G., Cleveland, W., Grannis, S., Ebert, D.: Generating synthetic syndromic surveillance data for evaluating visual analytics techniques. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications 29, 18-28 (2009) 2. Breiman, L., Freidman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., Stone, C. J.: Classification and Regression Trees.
Wadsworth, CA, (1984) 3. Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., Kumar, V.: Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 41(3), 1–58 (2009) 10 What Makes an Effective Euler Diagram?
Andrew Blake 1, Gem Stapleton 1, Peter Rodgers 2, and John Howse 1 1 University of Brighton, Brighton, UK {A.L.Blake,G.E.Stapleton,John.Howse}@brighton.ac.uk 2 University of Kent, Canterbury, UK P.J.Rodgers@kent.ac.uk Abstract. Euler diagrams can be an effective representation of information when they are both wellmatched and well-formed. However, being well-matched and well-formed alone does not imply effectiveness. Other diagrammatical properties need to be considered. Information visualisation theorists have known for some time that orientation, shape and colour have the potential to effect our interpretation of diagrams. This paper explains why well-matched, well-formed drawing principles are insufficient, illustrates why we should study the orientation, shape and colour of Euler diagrams, and briefly describes our research approach for this endeavor.
1 Introduction Euler diagrams represent set theoretic relationships using interconnected closed curves often drawn using circles or ovals. Curves are labelled, so affording context to the information or data therein. Figure 1 contains three Euler diagrams, all representing the same information, and illustrates there are syntactic choices to be made when using Euler diagrams to visualise data. Each diagram tells us that Course Leaders are a subset of Lecturers, Lecturers are a subset of Academics, and these staff could be Managers. Later in the paper we will discuss the syntactic differences between the diagrams in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Staff Hierarchy Euler diagrams are regarded a natural and effective way to depict sets and their relationships.
They are found in a wide variety of contexts including architecture, arts and social media. Wilkinson [9] presents a survey of natural science journals and online affiliated content from 2009 observing 72 occurrences of Euler diagrams. To support their use in information visualisation, various researchers have devised automated drawing techniques. Set Visualiser [7] and Vennmaster[1] are examples of software development projects that automatically draw Euler diagrams. It is essential that automatically generated Euler diagrams convey information accurately. Given the importance of accuracy and the variety of contexts in which Euler diagrams are used it is necessary to understand what makes an effective choice of diagram to represent any given data set. Having this understanding will inform the development of these tools and guide users towards drawing effective Euler diagrams.
11 Fig. 2. Staff hierarchy 2 Effective Euler Diagrams We will focus on two categories of so-called well-matched and well-formed drawing principles.
These are designed to yield effective diagrams where effective means reducing the average time taken to interpret them. Gurr [2], theorising well-matched diagrams, postulates that the most effective diagram is one with structure and property that matches, or closely matches, that which it strives to represent. Well-formedness describes relationships between curves and regions in a diagram. Rodgers et al. [6] empirically test these well-formedness properties observing the extent to which they impact comprehension. Gurr’s theory tell us to select well-matched diagrams and Rodgers et al.’s empirical work guides us to select well-formed diagrams.
In figure 1, d 1 is neither well-matched or well-formed. It is not well-matched as its shaded region denotes that there are no Course Leaders that are not Lecturers: the set of Course Leaders is contained by the set of Lecturers but CL is not contained by L. It is not wellformed as it has a disconnected zone: the region inside A and L but outside CL comprises two disconnected pieces. The diagram d 2 is well-matched but not well-formed. It is not well-formed as it has a disconnected zone, as described earlier, and a brushing point where CL meets L. The diagram d 3 is both wellmatched and well-formed. It does not exhibit any extraneous properties and the relationship between its curves and regions are neither disconnected or brushing and, therefore, it is regarded as the most effective at conveying information pertaining to staff hierarchy. There are a number of other well-formedness conditions that a diagram can exhibit. One example is concurrency which exists when two or more curve segments follow the same path [6].
3 Research Problems In addition to well-matched and well-formed, there are other diagrammatical properties to consider when ascertaining the effectiveness of a visual representation. For example, perceptual theorists know that we are sensitive to the diagrammatical properties of orientation, shape and colour [8]. Aware of this phenomena, information visualisation theorists manipulate these properties, affecting our interpretation and, thus, comprehension of diagrams [3].
Figure 2 represents the same information as figure 1. Diagrams d 3, d 4, d 5 and d 6 are all wellmatched and well-formed and, by this property, regarded equally effective. However, there are clear visual differences between them which can be largely attributed to the shape of their curves.
Diagram d 3 uses circles, diagrams d 4 and d 5 use ellipses, and diagram d 6 uses irregular shapes.
Diagrams d 4 and d 5 are identical but diagram d 5 has been rotated -38 degrees. Diagrams d 3 to d 6 visually illustrate that well-matched well-formed drawing principles alone are too naive in yielding effective Euler diagrams. Conscious that other diagrammatical properties affect our interpretation of diagrams this research is aiming to ascertain the extent to which orientation, shape and colour impact our comprehension of Euler diagrams. For example, which diagram is more 12 effective, d 4 or d 5? Which shape or combination of shapes are the most effective? The convex and concave attributes of the irregular curves in diagram d 6 make them difficult to distinguish. If we colour each curve differently will they be easier to distinguish?
To meet these aims, this research will adopt an empirical approach. Consistent with other researchers who have investigated user comprehension [4, 5], we will record the time taken to answer questions as the primary dependent variable. For example, if orientation impacts on comprehension then we would expect to see, for some diagram, a significant difference between the mean time taken to answer the posed question under one orientation as compared to another orientation. Such a study exploring orientation has already been undertaken. We have yet to perform a detailed analysis of the data but early indications suggest that orientation does not effect our comprehension of Euler diagrams. If true, diagrams d 4 and d 5 can be said to be equally effective conveying information pertaining to staff hierarchy. Perhaps more significantly, this observation will underpin the work of existing researchers in this community who have already made this assumption [6].
4 References 1. H. Kestler et al. Vennmaster: Area-proportional Euler diagrams for functional GO analysis of microarrays. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(67), 2008.
2. C. Gurr. Effective diagrammatic communication: Syntactic, semantic and pragmatic issues.
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 10(4):317–342, 1999.
3. R. Mazza. Introduction to Information Visualisation. Springer, 2009.
4. H. Purchase, “Which aesthetic has the greatest effect on human understanding?” International Symposium on Graph Drawing. Springer, 1997, pp. 248–261.
5. N. Riche and T. Dwyer, “Untangling Euler diagrams,” IEEE Trans on Visualisation and Computer Graphics, vol. 16, pp. 1090–1097, 2010.
6. P. Rodgers, , L. Zhang, and H. Purchase. Wellformedness properties in Euler diagrams: Which should be used? In IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, to appear.
7. Set Visualiser. http://www-edc.eng.cam.ac.uk/tools/setvisualiser/, accessed Aug 2011.
8. A. Treisman. Preattentive processing in vision. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 31:156–177, January 1985.
9. L. Wilkinson. Exact and approximate area-proportional circular Venn and Euler diagrams.
IEEE Transactions on Visualisation and Computer Graphics, 18:321–330, February 2012.
13 The Serial Colour (SECO) Profile A Colour-Based Form of Graphical Representation A. Luke Mac Neill & Lillian P. Fanjoy University of New Brunswick Department of Psychology, Box 5050, Saint John, NB E 2 L 4 L 5 {s 8 me 9, d 9 za 0}@unb.ca Abstract. Colour has historically been underemphasized in the graphical representation of data. The current paper proposes a colour-based Serial Colour (SECO) profile, and illustrates using sample data from the Eating Attitudes Test (EAT-26). Typical and atypical examples are illustrated and compared.
Keywords: SECO, Serial colour profile, Colour graph 1 Introduction Colour has traditionally been underemphasized in the graphical representation of data. This minimization can be attributed to practical concerns. Colour printing is more difficult to produce and more cost-prohibitive than black-and-white printing. With the advancement and proliferation of computer technology, however, colour graphs are now easier to both create and mass reproduce [1]. The development of new graphical forms that are centered on colour might be beneficial, as they could provide a different perspective on data than one might receive from a line or bar graph.
The current paper proposes a new, colour-based form of graphical representation called a Serial Colour (SECO) profile. With a SECO profile, information from a rating scale questionnaire is tallied and converted into a sequence of proportional colour gradients within a square figure. This is illustrated using sample data from the short version of the Eating Attitudes Test (EAT-26), a 26 item questionnaire that is used to identify individuals with severe eating disturbances such as anorexia nervosa [2]. Global and factor scores are converted into SECO profiles, and typical and atypical examples are compared.
2 Methods Data was obtained for 69 female undergraduate students who completed the EAT-26 questionnaire. For demonstrative purposes, participants with missing data were deleted listwise. This amounted to 5 participants, leaving a pool of 64 participants.
SECO profiles were constructed. First, questionnaire answers were tallied for each participant, so that each person had one score for each answer category: Always (indicative of higher scores on the EAT-26), Usually, Often, Sometimes, Rarely, and Never (the least eating-disordered answer).
Question 26 was a reverse-scored question, and this was taken into consideration during the 14 analysis. These tallies were then converted into percentages of the participant’s overall answers, which were subsequently represented as proportional areas on a square figure. The two extreme answers were depicted by two colour anchors: red for Always, and blue for Never. Intermediate answers were represented by gradient colours between these two colour anchors.
This procedure was repeated for group scores. In addition to a profile for the total sample, those with a BMI outside of the normal range (18.5 to 25) were isolated. This resulted in two additional group profiles: underweight (BMI below 18.5) and overweight/obese (BMI above 25). Factor scores were calculated for each of these groups, with 13 questions contributing to the dieting factor, six questions contributing to the bulimia and food preoccupation factor, and seven questions contributing to the oral control factor. Profiles were created to illustrate these factor scores.
3 Results Figure 1 A shows the SECO profile for the total sample. The blue-skewed profile indicates a greater number of non-disordered answers, with progressively fewer answers for disordered eating. Figure 1 B shows the profile for Participant 18, an atypical example. The red-skewed profile indicates a greater amount of eating disordered answers. Figures 1 C and 1 D show the profiles for two participants who had identical clinical scores on the EAT-26 questionnaire. Upon examination of their profiles, one can see clear distinctions in their answering patterns. Participant 2 (1 C) tended to give more moderate answers, with fewer answers at either extreme. Participant 24 (1 D) gave a greater proportion of answers at both extremes, with fewer moderate answers.
Fig. 1. SECO profiles for total sample (Panel A), participant 18 (B), Participant 2 (C), Participant 24 (D), underweight group (E), and overweight/obese group (F).
Panels 1 E and 1 F show the respective profiles for the underweight and overweight/obese groups.
These groups show similar answering patterns to the total sample, with slightly fewer disordered answers from the underweight group, and slightly more disordered answers from the overweight/ obese group. Their factor scores show subtleties in responding, however. Dieting subscale scores (Figure 2, top row) showed more disordered responding for the overweight/obese group (2 C). Bulimia and food preoccupation scores (Figure 2, middle row) showed less disordered responding for the underweight group (2 E). Oral control scores (Figure 2, bottom row) showed more disordered responding for the underweight group (2 H).
15 Total Sample Underweight Overweight/ Obese Fig. 2. SECO profiles for dieting (Panels A, B, C), bulimia and food preoccupation (Panels D, E, F), and oral control (Panels G, H, I) factor scores; for total sample, underweight group, and overweight/obese group.
4 Discussion SECO profiles are useful for demonstrating variations in rating scale answering patterns. They provide an immediate impression due to their colour dimension. In addition, they illustrate subtleties in questionnaire answering that might not be available from a global numerical score. Complexities could also be added. Questionnaire items could be weighted by importance, and proportional scores could be placed within each segmental area (or directly outside the graph area) for more numerical precision.
5 References 1. Wainer, H.: Visual Revelations: Graphical Tales of Fate and Deception from Napoleon Bonaparte to Ross Perot. Copernicus, New York (1997).
2. Garner, D.M., Olmsted, M.P., Bohr, Y., & Garfinkel, P.E.: The Eating Attitudes Test: psychometric features and correlates. Psychological Medicine, 12, 871-878 (1982) 16 Towards a Visual Compositional Relational Programming Methodology Gorkem Pacacı, Andreas Hamfelt Department of Informatics and Media Uppsala University Abstract. We present a new visual programming method, based on Combilog, a compositional relational programming language. In this paper we focus on the compositional aspect of Combilog, the make operator, visually implementing it via a modification of Higraph diagrams, in an attempt to overcome the obscurity and complexity in the textual representation of this operator.
1 Introduction Recent interest in parallel programming has put declarative programming methodologies such as functional programming and relational programming even more in focus thanks to their natural aptitude for modularity and parallelization [5]. Combilog, as a point of departure for our study, is a compositional relational programming language. The compositional nature of Combilog comes from the make operator, presented in detail in the following sections. In this study, we focus on eliminating the textual complexity that arises from this generalised projection operator using diagrams.
In the following subsections, we present the programming language, Combilog, and the steps to represent Combilog programs with Harel’s Higraph [5]. In the sections that follow, we explain how we combine the make operator and Higraphs, as a first step to form a visual language.
1.1 Combilog Programming languages o er ways of producing new components out of available ones. In Functional Programming, one example is higher-order functions. In Logic Programming, there are also (cid:417) λ languages like Prolog which allow writing higher-order predicates.
Combilog follows a similar path for logic programming, applying Quine’s Predicate-Functor Logics developed and updated in [7] and [6]. Instead, higher-level predicate functors are used to permute, replicate or exclude argument-places [3]. Combilog generalizes these functors into a single operator called make that can satisfy the same requirements for modification of argumentplaces, as explained in [2]. It also introduces two quasi higher-order predicates as recursion operators: foldr and foldl. [2] and [4] explain in detail, how make, foldr and foldl operators, together with n-ary conjunction and disjunction, and a few pre-defined ground predicates provide a programming model. It is important to note that in this paper we focus on visualization of only one of the apparatus in Combilog, the make operator. Together with boolean expressions, make operator builds the composite structure of Combilog. Other operators like folds, and any other ground 17