Moving Object Proposals with Deep Learned Optical Flow for Video Object Segmentation Ge Shi Zhili Yang Umass Amherst Umass Amherst 140 Governors Dr 140 Governors Dr geshi@umass.cs.edu zhiliyang@umass.cs.edu Abstract Dynamicsceneunderstandingisoneofthemostconspicuous field of interest among computer vision community.
In order to enhance dynamic scene understanding, pixelwise segmentation with neural networks is widely accepted.
The latest researches on pixel-wise segmentation combined semantic and motion information and produced good performance. In this work, we propose a state of art architecture of neural networks to accurately and efficiently get Figure 1. Fusion static object information and motion information the moving object proposals (MOP [12]). We first train an to segment images.
unsupervised convolutional neural network (Un Flow [11]) to generate optical flow estimation. Then we render the output of optical flow net to a fully convolutional Seg Net video, but the variational information with respect to time model. The main contribution of our work is (1) Fine-tuning base also facilitates better understanding of object indepenthe pretrained optical flow model on the brand new DAVIS dence. The traditional methods solving this problem [22, 3] Dataset [14]; (2) Leveragingfully convolutional neural net- relies on hand-crafted features without leveraging CNN to works with Encoder-Decoder architecture to segment ob- learn video representation. Recently, proposal of regions jects. We developed the codes with Tensor Flow, and exe- thatlikelycontainsindependentobjectsandusing CNN curcuted the training and evaluation processes on an AWS EC 2 rently dominate object detection in static images. Object instance. segmentation [17] is on the basis of proposed regions of interest object. When it comes to segmentation of moving objects in videos, [7] came up with a paradigm for detecting moving objects in videos by introducing moving ob 1. Introduction ject proposals (MOP). MOP [12] is a motion based proposal The Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN [13]) has method to generate a set of region proposals in each frame achieved great success in learning image features. Through using segmentations on optical flow [19]. To get impressive Encoder-Decoder model, the convolutional neural networks results in objects segmentation in video, many advanced can preserve spatial information when extracting general works [4, 10, 16, 11] unites optical flow boundaries comfeature maps. This model greatly promoted the perfor- ing from motion information and static boundaries coming mance of convolution neural networks when handling pixel- from static object proposals.
wise segmentation [1] and object detection [15] tasks. Seg Net [1] is a deep fully convolutional neural net Pixel-wise segmentation [6] is to assign each pixel an class work architecture for semantic pixel-wise segmentation, for based on its semantic meaning or which object it belongs which the model can be divided into two parts, encoder and to. decoder (Figure 2). The encoder contains the 13 convo Video object segmentation [5, 8] is the task of extracting lutional layers adapted from VGG 16 [18] network, which spatial regions corresponding to objects from a sequence is commonly used in many segmentation architectures; the of image frames (Figure 1). This is not just a process to decoder uses pooling indices computed in the max-pooling apply image segmentation algorithm to all frames in the step of the corresponding encoder to perform non-linear up 1 4202 be F 41 ]VC.sc[ 1 v 28880.2042:vi Xra Figure 2. Convolution and deconvolution layers sampling. In our project, instead of semantic segmentation, and outputs a dense optical flow map using an encoderwe adapted the source codes to achieve moving object seg- decoder architecture. For supervised training, a large synmentation in videos. thetic dataset was generated from static background images Optical flow is another traditional computer vision re- and renderings of animated 3 D chairs. A follow up work search area which estimates the relative motion of objects [10] introduced the more accurate, but also slower and more and edges in a visual scene. The algorithms utilizing neu- complex Flow Net 2 family of supervised networks.
ral networks to address the task have been invented re- Un Flow: [11] built on the previous Flow Net-based netcently. Researchers explored both innovative supervised works and extend it unsupervised video segmentation setand unsupervised structures of optical flow learning net- tings. First, they designed a symmetric, occlusion-aware works. Flow Net [4] and Un Flow [11] are representatives loss based on bidirectional (i.e., forward and backward) opof them. tical flow estimates. Second, they trained Flow Net C with In this work, we decided to develop a neural networks to their comprehensive unsupervised loss to estimate bidirecsegment objects in video leveraging unsupervised learning tional flow. Third, they made use of iterative refinement by neural networks to train optical flow and feed the outputs of stacking multiple Flow Net networks. Optionally, they can optical flow estimation to into a Seg Net model. also use a supervised loss for fine-tuning their networks on We choose DAVIS 2017 [14] as the dataset for training sparse ground truth data after unsupervised training.
and evaluation, which contains 50 high quality video se 2.2. Methods for Object Segmentation quences and so as the corresponding ground truth for evaluation. Each video of the dataset is not limited in one spe PCM [2]: In this work, a likelihood function uses a novel cific object, instead it might contain multiple objects in one combination of the angle and magnitude of the optical flow frame and each of them are annotated in the ground truth.
to maximize the information about the truth motions of objects is derived. It is used for assessing the probability of an 2. Related Works optical flow vector given the 3 D motion direction.
MP-Net [20]: MP-Net learns to recognize motion patterns 2.1. Methods for Estimating Optical Flow in a flow field. Despite its decent performance, it is lim Flow Net [4]: End-to-end supervised learning of convolu- ited by its frame-based nature and also overlooks appeartional networks for optical flow was first introduced with ance features of objects.
Flow Net. The network takes two consecutive input images Conv GRU-Net [21]: Conv GRU-Net is a novel approach 2 methods (Figure 3), (cid:90) min { (|∇u(x,y)|2 + |∇v(x,y)|2)dΩ+ u(x),v(x) Ω (cid:90) λ (I + I u(x,y) + I v(x,y))dΩ} t x y Ω where Ω is the image domain. The improvement of basic variational energy function has been exhaustively studied by researchers. We adopt the the Charbonnier penalty (cid:112) Ψ(x) = (x 2 + ϵ2) and here ϵ is 0.001. Then we have two terms of loss function.
Figure 3. Unsupervised learning model based on variational con- (cid:90) straint.
l = λ Ψ(I (x,y) − I (x + u(x,y),y + v(x,y)))+ d 1 2 Ω for video object segmentation. It combines two compleΨ(∇I ) + Ψ(∇I )dΩ x y mentary sources of information: appearance and motion, (cid:90) with a visual memory module, realized as a bidirectional l = Ψ(u(x,y)−u(x+1,y))+Ψ(u(x,y+1)−u(x,y))+ s convolutional gated recurrent unit. The Conv GRU module Ω encodes spatio-temporal evolution of objects in a video and Ψ(v(x,y) − v(x + 1,y)) + Ψ(v(x,y + 1) − v(x,y))dΩ uses this encoding to improve motion segmentation.
l take the warped first image and second image as input d and minimize the difference. l 3. Technical Approach s 3.2. Moving Object Proposals Our method to segment moving objects can be separated as two steps: (1) training an unsupervised neural net- We propose a temporal stable moving object detector usworkstolearnopticalflow; (2)feedinga Seg Netmodelwith ing Seg Net architecture. As we can see from Figure 4, Segthe learned output from optical flow networks and generate Net is separated into two different parts, encoder and demoving object segmentation. The details are as following. coder. Basically, the encoder uses the first 13 convolutional layers from the VGG 16 networks that designed for object 3.1. Optical Flow classification. And in the decoder part, each layer has a Since suggested [9], most dense approaches estimating corresponding layer in the encoder, therefore, it also conoptical flow are based on the variational formulation. Ac- tains 13 layers as the encoder. At the end, the output of decording to the optical flow constraint, the gray value of a coder is fed to a multi-class soft-max classifier to produce moving pixel stays constant over time, i.e. class probability for each pixel. In our project, since our goal is producing segmentation for moving objects rather than semantic segmentation; after getting the input images I(x,y,t) = I(x + u,y + v,t + 1) from the optical flow model, the Seg Net model only needs where (u,v) is the optical flow vector of a pixel (x,y) from to consider the foreground objects and the background in time t to time t +1. Using the first-order Taylor approxi- each image. Therefore, we only need two classes in softmation, the linearized version of the image function can be max function.
derived.
I(x,y,t) ≈ I(x,y,t + 1) + ∇I(x,y,t + 1)T(u,v) 0 = I(x,y,t + 1) − I(x,y,t) + ∇I(x,y,t + 1)T(u,v) The partial derivatives of the image function can be denoted as I , I ,and I . The optical flow constraint equation has t x y inherent dependency on the image position (x,y).
Figure 4. Seg Net Architecture 0 = I + I u + I v.
t x y In each encoder layer, it performs convolutional with a The smoothness penalty which penalizes the derivative of filter bank, and followed by batch normalization and Re Lu, the optical flow field, was introduced by the variational what’s more, max-pooling is also used at the end to achieve 3 translation invariance over small spatial shifts in the in- each 250 iterations. Figure 6. displays the losses along with put image. However, max-pooling causes boundary detail the iterations. As we can see, the training loss dropped draloses. As a solution, the Seg Net model stores the max- matically at the beginning, but it stopped reducing at 400.
pooling indices for each encoder layer, and in each decoder In the middle of the training process, we tried to reduce the layer, it can use corresponding indices for upsampling. learning rate to 0.25 e−6 and even smaller, but the training In the training procedure, we train all the variants with loss still could not reduce. It might be due to the other hy Adam Optimizer and the corss-entropy loss function. perparameters that take significant roles in the model. But we did not get enough time and resource to have a further 3.3. Expected results and Evaluation test.
We decide to evaluate our results by applying the intersection over union overlap (Io U) between the final results 4.1.3 Successful Approach and the ground truth. We can compute Io U according to the Instead of training everything from scratch, we finally deformula below, cided to move to a pretrained model that has been finetuned. After modifying the codes of evaluation, we success Io U = A ∩ B/A ∪ B fully adapted our DAVIS 2017 into the pretrained model.
where A denotes the area covered on the expected outputs and B denotes the area annotated on ground truth. Accord 4.1.4 Results Evaluation ing to the formula, Io U simply means the proportion of the overlap area within the union area of the model’s output and Although, the pretrained model could provide us with relthe corresponding ground truth. atively better outputs than our original model, the outputs Baselines: For the evaluation, we decide to compare our still consist a lot of glitches that might affect the final remethod with an advanced methods PCM [2]. sults of the whole model. We summarize some common errors occur among those outputs in Figure 7.
4. Experiment Obstacles: As we can see from the example Dog agility in Figure 7, the unflow outputs includes the pillars as moving Our model consists of two parts: (1) Unflow net (Unobjects, which might make sense because while the dog is supervised Learning of Optical Flow); (2) Seg Net: A crossing those pillars, it might also cause the pillars keep Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Imvibrating in different frames. As a result, those vibrating age Segmentation. In our implementation, we combined the pillars are also detected.
two models, and modified the source codes for training the Reflections: Reflections are another common features in dataset DAVIS 2017 [14]. The evaluation details are as folimages, for example, in flamingo, the reflection of the lowing.
flamingo on the water is also included in the output.
Edges: It is easy for the model to recognize the body of 4.1. Unflow Experiment an object, but detecting edge’s information always be a big In our implementation, we modified the input and train- problem for the model. We can find this problem almost in ing codes to import the DAVIS 2017 as our training and all examples in Figure 7, such as the missing arms and legs evaluation dataset. In the training process, only first two im- in dance twirl and tennis, the missing wheels in bus and car ages in each classes (50 classes) were chosen to be trained, shadow.
the training iterations for each class was set as 250.
4.2. Seg Net Experiment 4.1.1 Pre-processing 4.2.1 Training Details First, we divide the images in each class into a pair of lists, We trained the Seg Net with Adam Optimizer for 10000 iteach pair of images are consecutive frames, therefore, they erations. β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, the start learning rate is could be stacked and fed as inputs into the model. What’s 5 e−4, with a decay of 0.5 times every 2000 global steps.
more, all images need to be reshaped to 448 × 832, then We fed the optical flow estimation from Unflow and ground applied normalization. truth segmentation into Seg Net and the get the moving object segmentation.
4.1.2 Early attempts and failures 4.2.2 Qualitative Analysis At the beginning, we decided to train our modified model from scratch. The learning rate was 0.25 e−5, and the save We evaluate our results on the evaluation dataset of DAVIS interval = 250, so that a checkpoint would be generated in for the lack of test data. The Figure 8 shows the loss de 4 Figure 5. Seg Net and Unflow predictions of the samples from DAVIS 2017 Measure PCM CVOS KEY NLC FST Ours Mean IOU 40.1 48.2 49.8 55.1 55.8 41.9 Table 1. Our method compared to other state-of-the-art methods on DAVIS.
erties of Unflow networks. Also, we found in training process, the segmentation boundaries of moving object tends to shrink with the increasing of training steps.
5. Conclusion Figure 6. Unflow training loss 5.1. Insights creasing with global steps growing. We compared out ap This paper introduces a novel approach for video movproach with Table 1 compares our approach to the state-ofing object segmentation. In general, we tried to combine the-art methods on DAVIS. The measure to evaluate results Unflow and Seg Net to get the motion segmentation and the is mean IOU. Because our approach only consider the mobasic idea is working. However, limited by time and retion information without semantic information, the result of sources, we cannot train the networks with a lot more global ours can only be a little better than PCM. When it is put on steps and elaborate parameters. In this work, we leveraged the test data, we assume it would be worse to some extent.
the state-of-the-art unsupervised optical flow estimation approach and fine-tuned it on the novel DAVIS 2017 dataset 4.2.3 Quantitative Analysis in which we learned the constrained optical flow formula Based on the results of our experiment, we found our net- with smoothness penalty. Besides, we studied the Encoderworks is more suitable for segment monolithic moving ob- Decoder architecture and the advantages of up-sampling jects with gentle motion. This come from the intrinsic prop- and up-convolutional layers.
5 Figure 7. The predicted outputs generated by fine-tuned model of Unflow video learning tasks, detached CNN cannot preserve the learned features from the previous frames. To solve this problem, Conv LSTM is developed with the motivation to unify CNN and LSTM in one model. Conv LSTM is one kind of LSTM which is specially designed to aid images sequence learning with convolutional layer as input processing cell. The most recent research adopted this model in video object segmentation and outperforms previous work.
The conv LSTM layer can be inserted between the Encoder and Decoder layer.
5.2.2 Involving Semantic Information Currently, our work feeds the output of Unflow networks to Seg Net, but the two network architecture can be simplified Figure 8. Seg Net training loss by unifying those two. We assume the input image can be rendered into two branches of local network. One is the Encoder part of semantic networks and the other is the dilated 5.2. Future Improvement convolution layers of Unflow. Than take both tensors into The analysis of results inspires us to make improvement the Decoder architecture. At the loss end, optical flow unin the flowing ways. supervised loss and segmentation supervised loss are both considered. In this process, not only the networks can be simplified by removing redundancy but also the semantic 5.2.1 Adding LSTM Model information is taken into consider.
Normal convolutional neural networks deal with independent images in an impressive way. However, in sequential 6 References ceedingsofthe IEEE conferenceoncomputervisionandpattern recognition, pages 779–788, 2016.
[1] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla. Segnet: A [16] Z. Ren, J. Yan, B. Ni, B. Liu, X. Yang, and H. Zha. Unsudeep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image pervised deep learning for optical flow estimation. In Prosegmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, machine intelligence, 39(12):2481–2495, 2017.
volume 31, 2017.
[2] P. Bideau and E. Learned-Miller. It’s moving! a probabilis- [17] X. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Wang, D.-Y. Yeung, W.-K. Wong, and tic model for causal motion segmentation in moving camera W.-c.Woo. Convolutionallstmnetwork: Amachinelearning videos. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14 th European approach for precipitation nowcasting. Advances in neural Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, information processing systems, 28, 2015.
2016, Proceedings, Part VIII 14, pages 433–449. Springer, [18] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional 2016.
networks for large-scale image recognition. ar Xiv preprint [3] H.-D. Cheng, X. H. Jiang, Y. Sun, and J. Wang. Color image ar Xiv:1409.1556, 2014.
segmentation: advances and prospects. Pattern recognition, [19] D. Sun, S. Roth, and M. J. Black. Secrets of optical flow 34(12):2259–2281, 2001.
estimation and their principles. In 2010 IEEE computer so- [4] A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, C. Hazirbas, cietyconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition, V. Golkov, P. Van Der Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox.
pages 2432–2439. IEEE, 2010.
Flownet: Learningopticalflowwithconvolutionalnetworks.
[20] P. Tokmakov, K. Alahari, and C. Schmid. Learning motion In Proceedingsofthe IEEE internationalconferenceoncompatternsinvideos. In Proceedingsofthe IEEE conferenceon puter vision, pages 2758–2766, 2015.
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3386–3394, [5] S. Dutt Jain, B. Xiong, and K. Grauman. Fusionseg: Learn 2017.
ing to combine motion and appearance for fully automatic [21] P.Tokmakov,K.Alahari,and C.Schmid. Learningvideoobsegmentation of generic objects in videos. In Proceedings of ject segmentation with visual memory. In Proceedings of the the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages nition, pages 3664–3673, 2017.
4481–4490, 2017.
[6] M. Fayyaz, M. H. Saffar, M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, R. Klette, [22] Y. J. Zhang. A survey on evaluation methods for image segand F. Huang. Stfcn: spatio-temporal fcn for semantic video mentation. Pattern recognition, 29(8):1335–1346, 1996.
segmentation. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1608.05971, 2016.
[7] K. Fragkiadaki, P. Arbelaez, P. Felsen, and J. Malik. Learning to segment moving objects in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4083–4090, 2015.
[8] N. Haque, N. D. Reddy, and K. M. Krishna. Joint semantic and motion segmentation for dynamic scenes using deep convolutional networks. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1704.08331, 2017.
[9] B. K. Horn and B. G. Schunck. Determining optical flow.
Artificial intelligence, 17(1-3):185–203, 1981.
[10] E. Ilg, N. Mayer, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox. Flownet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2462– 2470, 2017.
[11] S.Meister, J.Hur, and S.Roth. Unflow: Unsupervisedlearning of optical flow with a bidirectional census loss. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[12] P. O. O Pinheiro, R. Collobert, and P. Dolla´r. Learning to segment object candidates. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
[13] K. O’Shea and R. Nash. An introduction to convolutional neural networks. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1511.08458, 2015.
[14] J.Pont-Tuset, F.Perazzi, S.Caelles, P.Arbela´ez, A.Sorkine Hornung, and L. Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1704.00675, 2017.
[15] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi. You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In Pro 7