Deep Reinforcement Learning for Scheduling in Cellular Networks Jian Wang∗, Chen Xu∗, Yourui Huangfu∗, Rong Li∗, Yiqun Ge†, Jun Wang∗ ∗ Hangzhou Research Center, Huawei Technologies, Hangzhou, China † Ottawa Research Center, Huawei Technologies, Ottawa, Canada Emails: {wangjian 23, xuchen 14, huangfuyourui, lirongone.li, yiqun.ge, justin.wangjun}@huawei.com Abstract—Integrating artificial intelligence (AI) into wireless welldefined system, an AI module could help this system to networks has drawn significant interest in both industry and work better by its inherent learning and adapting capability.
academia. A common solution is to replace partial or even all To prove our belief, we choose scheduler as an example modules in the conventional systems, which is often lack of effifor a AI enabled module in wireless network domain in this ciency and robustness due to their ignoring of expert knowledge.
paper. A scheduler is the center of a cellular network system In this paper, we take deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based scheduling as an example to investigate how expert knowledge , decides how radio resources are allocated among users.
can help with AI module in cellular networks. A simulation A typical conventional scheduler considers channel conditions platform, which has considered link adaption, feedback and other and Qo S requirements to make allocation decisions based on practical mechanisms, is developed to facilitate the investigation.
some formulas. It is a deterministic way suffering from a low Besides the traditional way, which is learning directly from the flexibility. To mitigate it, proposed a Markov Decision Proenvironment, for training DRL agent, we propose two novel methods, i.e., learning from a dual AI module and learning from cess (MDP) solved by Dynamic Programming (DP). However, the expert solution. The results show that, for the considering along with increasing size of the system, DP is too complex scheduling problem, DRL training procedure can be improved on to be supported and the transition probabilities and states of both performance and convergence speed by involving the expert the environment are too hard to known a priori. Naturally, knowledge. Hence, instead of replacing conventional scheduling deep reinforcement learning (DRL) offers an alternative to module in the system, adding a newly introduced AI module, which is capable to interact with the conventional module and optimization over multiple dimensional data or signals. The provide more flexibility, is a more feasible solution. DRL agent of the scheduler would observe the states of Index Terms—artificial intelligence, cellular networks, deep the environment, decides the actions, executes them into the reinforcement learning, scheduling, proportional fair environment, waits for the feedback reward, and transits to the next states. In this way, the agent learns from the environment and improves its decisionmaking strategy.
I. INTRODUCTION There have benn already several studies about scheduler Artificial intelligence (AI) technology has succeeded in in- based on DRL. The work in focusing on a Vehicletojecting ”intelligence” into a system to outperform humankind Infrastructure (V 2 I) scenario uses DRL based scheduler to in many domains. Some have explored its applications into extend the lifetime of the batterypowered Road Side Units the wireless communication domain, as summarized in (RSU s) while promoting a safe environment that meets acceptand . Wireless network is a complex system consisting of able Qo S levels. Chinchali et al. uses DRL based scheduler to several layers, each of which contains a functionalityspecific optimize the Internet of Things (IoT) traffic without impacting module. Such a module is either represented or approximated conventional realtime applications such as voicecalling and by a mathematical expression. So far there are two major video . A joint user scheduling and content caching strategy ways to adopt AI into the wireless network domain. The based on DRL is studied in , to decide whether to cache first is to use AI to replace endtoend transceiver system certain content and to select which smallcell base station completely, in which both transmitter and receiver are realized (SBS) to serve certain UE simultaneously. In , a DRL by neural networks (NN s). The second is to replace a part of based scheduler is designed to coordinate packet transmission the functionalityspecific modules by NN s in the transceiver. from different buffers through multiple channels in a cognitive Both suffer from a low efficiency and suboptimal performance IoT network. An uplink scheduling problem is studied in in missing of expert knowledge or comprehension about , where DRL is used to choose K from N UE s to allow wireless environment. The presence of NN based modules on their uplink transmission to maximize throughput under power a transceiver would not only undermine interoperability and consumption consideration. These scenarios in these works stability, but also increases complexity. Therefore, we believe are generally quite complex, because of multiclass services it more feasible for a AI module to work with traditional (e.g., IoT traffic and conventional traffic) or network devices modules by mostly coordinating the working flows among (e.g., primary users and secondary users in cognitive networks, these traditional modules, cooperating with them, or even macrocell BS and smallcell BS in heterogeneous networks).
replace them temporarily if needed. Instead of breaking into a There is no readyforuse scheduling algorithm in these scenar 9102 lu J 32 ]TI.sc[ 2 v 41950.5091:vi Xra ios, hence no one is able to provide a baseline for comparison. where it is “feasible” that all the data rates should be no Although DRL agent was introduced therein, the capability, smaller than zero and the total summation of data rates should performance and efficiency thanks to DRL based scheduler are be no larger than the system capacity. When the utility function difficult to study with no baseline. Moreover, except the one in U is logarithm function, the solution of problem (2) has the n that employed real field data for training and verification, unique vector of rates, which is named as proportionally fair others used loose assumptions to generate the training and test . Therefore, the PF scheduling algorithm is optimal in term data samples. For instance, data rate is derived directly from of maximizing the sum of logarithmic rate.
Shannon’s equation, without considering adaptive modulation Kelly provides a general principle about proportional fairand coding (AMC) and outer loop link adaption (OLLA). All ness. Later, adopts it into the scenario of wireless netundoubtedly eases the learning requirement but makes it even works with a single carrier. The only carrier (or say channel) more dubious in practical systems. should be allocated to the UE with the largest metric of I /T , n n In this paper, we go back to the case with the simplest where I is the instantaneous throughput estimated from the n settings in a cellular network and investigate scheduling based updated channel condition and T is the average throughput n on DRL in the proposed AI enabled network structure. We within a past window for the nth UE, repectively. This metric will firstly try a directlearning method in which a DRL agent indicates that those UE s with higher instantaneous throughput directly learns from the environment. Then, we propose two (i.e., better channel condition) should have higher priority to novel training methods: duallearning and expertlearning. For access the channel resource, to improve the overall throughput the duallearning method, two independent agents are trained of the system, while at the same time, whose with smaller alternatively and learns from each other. For expertlearning historic throughput should be given more chance to access the method, the PF algorithm is employed as expert knowledge to channel, to guarantee some degree of fairness. To summarize, help with DRL agent training. By evaluating and comparing all for a singlecarrier system, to achieve proportional fair, UE the three methods, we could demonstrate the DRL’s learning should be chosen according to capability and how expert knowledge to help improve per I n i = argmax (3) formance and accelerate training speed. To create an emulator T n∈N n environment as much close to true practical cellular network as where, the average throughput is updated according to possible, we developed a system simulator containing nearly all the link adaption, feedback and scheduling mechanisms W − 1 1 T (t) = T (t − 1) + I (t) (4) used in real LTE networks. n W n W n The structure of this paper is as following. The preliminaries with W as the window size for averaging.
are first introduced in Section II. The network scenario, B. Deep Reinforcement Learning problem formulation and learning methodologies are described in Section III. Then, some trials are carried out in Section IV. An MDP is typically defined by state space S, action set Conclusions are made in Section V, where several future work A, reward function R and transition probability P. The target directions are provided. is to find a policy π that maximizes the expected (discounted) reward. Reinforcement learning (RL) can be utilized to solve II. PRELIMINARIES MDP if the full knowledge is unavailable, e.g., R and/or P are A. Proportional Fair (PF) Scheduling Algorithms unknown. The RL agent learns from the interactions with the environment gradually. There are such classical RL algorithms Proportional Fair (PF) is among the most widely used as Qlearning, Policy Gradient (PG), Actor Critic, etc. They scheduling algorithms. It provides a tradeoff between system are useful to solve MDP with small scales of states. However, overall throughput and fairness among UE s. Therefore, we set out practical MDP has usually largescale states and compli PF as the baseline in this paper. As a preliminary, we brief cated state transitions, so that the computational complexity PF algorithm in this section as follows. Consider a scheduling of classical RL algorithms quickly becomes unaffordable. As scenario in which a total amount of resource (system capacity) a result, DNN s are introduced to improve both the learning C is allocated among N UE s in the set N. Each UE has a data performance and training speed.
rate x ,n ∈ N. A set of rates {x ,n ∈ N} is proportionally n n Deep QN etwork (DQN) is a typical RL algorithm fair if feasible (i.e., x ≥ 0 and sum of x is no larger than C) n n and if for any other feasible set {x∗,n ∈ N}, the aggregate that uses a DNN to approximate Q value. Quadruples of n (St,At,Rt,St+1) that represents current state, current action, of proportional changes is zero or negative : current reward, and next state are stored as experience, from (cid:88) x∗ − x n n ≤ 0 (1) which a minibatch would randomly samples a number of x n the quadruples (experience replay) to train the DNN s. In this n∈N way, both new and old quadruples have chance to be included F. Kelly formulates it into an utility maximization problem: in the minibatch. A typical DQN contains two architecture- (cid:88) max U (x ) identical DNN s: target network and evaluation network. The n n (2) target network is fixed for several training steps; whereas n∈N the evaluation network is updated every episode. After a s.t. x is feasible n DRL Agent MAC Scheduling BS MAC UE MAC Radio AI module State Reward Action Broadcast Medium Fig. 2. Functional structure of the system simulator.
training Sys. Simulator Environment seed 0 (system simulator) Sys. Simulator DRL thread DRL agent seed 1 Fig. 1. Simulation platform. ... PF thread Sys. Simulator given period, the target network would be updated by the seedn Moving window for training or evaluation evaluation one. (cid:15)-greedy algorithm is used for some probability Continuously running processes (sync or async) of exploration.
Although DQN (valuebased method) is good at making discrete decisions, systems in many applications have continuous state/action spaces. Policybased methods are more efficient in transferring data packets as well as generating and handling these problems because they directly optimize on the policy control channel signals such as HARQ and CSI reporting.
π. In addition, the actorcritic algorithm learns both a value Meanwhile, the BS MAC relies on the scheduling module function and a policy to reduce the gradient variance of PG.
to allocate resources to UE s. The Radio module has two Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) is introduced main functions: to check if the data packets can be decoded as the extension of DQN and deterministic policy gradient, successfully or not, and to calculate the feedback quantities which is an offpolicy actorcritic algorithm suitable for highsuch as SINR and rank. The Broadcast Medium module keeps dimension continuous problems. DDPG employs experience tracking on antenna sets and their channels. The module replay and soft target network similar to DQN in order to mainly concerned by this paper is the MAC scheduler that improve the training stability.
focuses on making resource allocation decision based on the channel condition and historic throughput information. An III. NETWORK SCENARIO AND SIMULATION PLATFORM AI enabled module is embedded in the system to help the A. Network Scenario and Simulation Platform scheduling procedure. This system simulator realizes nearly In this paper, we consider a single cell cellular network all the link adaption and feedback function in LTE. The AMC following LTE standard. The BS is equipped with an AI function follows exactly the LTE standard, that modulation and scheduler. This AI enabled scheduler doesn’t break into the coding schemes (MCS s) are chosen from LTE MCS table with established conventional modules but schedules them.
a target block error ratio (BLER). A fixed step outer loop link It has been mentioned in Section IIA that, in a singleadaption is also employed to compensate the feedback error carrier system, PF algorithm based on Equation (3) can achieve due to the imperfection of feedback channel.
proportional fairness. Hence, we will investigate this single As shown in Fig. 3, multiple simulations with different UE carrier system by assuming there is only one resource block positions and data generation seeds are started simultaneously, group (RBG) containing all the resource blocks (RB s) in the so that the experience buffer contains the samples with differsystem. Then, DRL algorithms (DDPG) are installed in the ent UE deployments. These various samples help DRL agent AI module to see if and how they can cooperate with the to generalize, i.e., make good decisions in different situations.
scheduling module to achieve the optimum.
For each system simulator, two threads are initialized, one As shown in Fig. 1, the simulation platform contains a interacts with the DRL agent, and the other executes PF DRL agent realized in Tensorflow and a system simulator scheduling algorithm for performance comparison. Moving working as the environment. The system simulator provides windows is used to restrict the time scope of training and the interfaces for the agent to acquire states and rewards, and evaluation.
execute actions.
B. Problem Formulation The structure of the system simulator is shown in Fig. 2.
The BS MAC and UE MAC module are responsible for The MDP of this scenario is elaborated as follows.
Duallearning framework State: the instantaneous rate I (t) and average rate T (t) • n n for each UE n ∈ N are contained in the state St. Initialize two independent agents Reminding that the update of average rate as shown in Initialize two environments with the same seed Equation (4) involves the influence of the previous action while not convergent do through the term I (t), thus the transition from state TRAIN(agent ,agent ) n 0 1 .
St = (I (t),T (t)) to state St+1 is Markovian. TRAIN(agent ,agent ) n n 1 0 Action: Since a singlecarrier scheduling scenario is con- end while • sidered, the action is to decide which UE is scheduled function TRAIN(agent ,agent ) i j to occupy the only RBG in each scheduling period (i.e., Freeze parameters of agent j Transmission Time Interval, TTI in LTE). Similar to PF agent and agent interacts with environments i j algorithm, for DRL, the action output At is designed to Calculate reward for agent using the lookup table i be metrics for each UE. The BS can choose the UE with Update parameters of agent i the largest metric as the scheduled UE in each TTI. end function Reward: The reward design is fundamental in DRL, • because it has impacts on both system performance and training speed. In this paper, both the total throughput and 2) Dual Learning: In this subsection, we propose an alter UE fairness are considered into the reward. To quantify native framework of training DRL agents, i.e., duallearning, in the UE fairness, Jain’s fairness index (JFI) is used. the specific scheduling problem. As described in , The calculation of JFI is shown in Equation (5), where two independent agents are randomly initialized to interact V ,n ∈ N represents the received average throughput with the same environment. By training them alternatively, n of the nth UE. The details of reward calculation can be two agents can help each other set up a baseline and then explained from learning methodology perspective elabo- learn from it, eventually achieving global optimum.
rated in Section IIIC. Reward calculation for this framework is straightforward: reward increases by 1 if certain performance metric is better (cid:34) (cid:35)2(cid:44)(cid:34) (cid:35) N N (cid:88) (cid:88) than that of the other agent, or the increment is 0. The purpose fairness = V N V 2 (5) n n of the reward is that the DRL agent is encouraged to make n=1 n=1 better decisions than the opponent agent. To enable flexibility C. Learning Methodology of adjusting contribution weight of throughput and fairness, α In this section, three methods to calculate reward are elabo- and β are also introduced. Thus the reward can be designed rated. In terms of their learning procedures, we classify them into a lookup table, as seen in Table I. This duallearning into three different learning methodologies for DRL as shown procedure involves no expert knowledge from conventional in Fig. 4. scheduling algorithms.
1) Direct Learning: 3) Expert Learning: As the PF algorithm given by Equation (3) is proven to be a good tradeoff between throughput and reward = α × throughput + β × fairness (6) fairness, we can take advantage of it and speed up the training of DRL agent. For this expertlearning method, the reward rule The first learning methodology is directlearning, where the of duallearning method is reused, but one opponent agent DRL agent learn directly from the environment without conis replaced with the PF algorithm. Hence we have a similar sidering the expert knowledge. Taking throughput and fairness reward table Table II. Note that the reward will increase by into consideration, Equation (6) is the most straightforward 0.5 if certain metric is equal to PF algorithm because of PF’s reward function. Here, the throughput in the reward function optimality.
is the received instantaneous throughput, hence the UE with the best channel condition tends to be chosen. The fairness IV. TRIALS AND DISCUSSIONS is calculated through Equation (5). α and β are weighting In this section, we present the simulation results. A 10 MH z factors for throughput and fairness, respectively. Apparently, bandwidth single cell LTE network is considered with 5 UE s set α = 1 and β = 0 will lead to a performance similar to Max receiving fullbuffer traffic packets from the BS. The NN s used C/I. Without expert knowledge in this reward function, the in the DRL agent are fully connected ones with 2 hidden DRL agent is trained to learning directly from the environment layers, each of which contains 320 neurons. Re LU function and improve both throughput and fairness simultaneously.
is used as the activation function for all the hidden layers.
Softmax is used at the output layer of the actor network TABLE I and no activation function is used for the output layer of DUALLEARNING REWARD LOOKUP TABLE the critic network. The DRL agents are trained with 28 independently but simultaneously running system simulators for better convergence and generalization ability. We take PF Throughput > > ≤ ≤ JFI > ≤ > ≤ as baseline and compare DRL performance with it every 50 Reward α+β α β 0 training updates during the training process. The normalized DRL DRL Agent DRL Agent DRL PF algorithm state reward action state reward action state reward action Environment Environment Environment (a) Direct Learning (b) Dual Learning (c) Expert Learning Fig. 4. Learning methodologies.
TABLE II EXPERTLEARNING REWARD LOOKUP TABLE PF Throughput > > < < > = = = < JFI RL > < > < = > = < = Reward α+β α β 0 α+0.5β 0.5α+β 0.5(α+β) 0.5α 0.5β α = 1, β = 10 1 1 THP: RLPF FAIR: .5 0.5 0 0 -0.5 -0.5 -1 -1 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 number of updates number of updates ecnamrofrep dezilamron α = 1, β = 5 B. Dual 1 THP: RLPF For the duallearning procedure, we choose α = 0.85 and FAIR: .5 0.5 β = 1.05 in this experiment.
0 0 -0.5 -0.5 -1 -1 Fig. 5. Comparison between directlearning RL agent and PF algorithm.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 performance difference between DRL and PF algorithm is number of updates elaborated in the yaxes in the figures below, where a positive value means DRL algorithm performs better than the baseline.
The xaxes present the counts of training updates.
A. Direct Learning As shown in Fig. 5, the DRL algorithm converges quickly in ∼1000 updates, and then, nearly no obvious improvement can be obtained. The results show that DRL algorithm can achieve higher throughput with the sacrifice of fairness. To make fairness take higher weight in the reward function, we tried to adjust the weighting factors, e.g., from β/α = 5 to β/α = 10. The adjustment on α and β does help with the tradeoff between throughput and fairness, but PF state is still difficult to approach according to our simulations. The reason is that the wireless environment is nonstationary, that is, the reward may be different in training even if with the same state and action, thus the agent is hard to converge or quickly falls into local optimum.
ecnamrofrep dezilamron agent 0 agent 1 1 1 1 1 THP: RLPF THP: RLPF FAIR: RLPF FAIR: .5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0 0 0 0 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -1 -1 -1 -1 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 number of updates Fig. 6. Comparison between duallearning RL agent and PF algorithm.
As shown in Fig. 6, after ∼2000 updates for each agent, two agents both converge to nearoptimal. This method helps the DRL agent continuously make progress towards the global optimal solution. The drawback is that still no expert knowledge is used, hence the convergence speed is slow.
C. Expert Learning We choose α = 0.9 and β = 1.15 in this experiment. Fig. 7 records the throughput and JFI differences between DRL agent and PF algorithm. It can be seen that after ∼1000 updates, DRL agent converges to nearly optimal, and has successfully learnt from PF after ∼4000 updates, achieving optimum.
D. Discussions To conclude the above subsections, it is found for the investigated scheduling problem that: 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 number of updates ecnamrofrep dezilamron 1 1 .8 THP_RLPF 0.8 Q. Mao, F. Hu, and Q. Hao, “Deep learning for intelligent wireless 0.6 FAIR_RLPF 0.6 networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & 0.4 0.4 Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2595–2621, 2018.
0.2 0.2 C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and 0 0 wireless networking: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & -0.2 -0.2 Tutorials, 2019.
-0.4 -0.4 F. Capozzi, G. Piro, L. A. Grieco, G. Boggia, and P. Camarda, “Down- -0.6 -0.6 link packet scheduling in LTE cellular networks: Key design issues and -0.8 -0.8 a survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, -1 -1 pp. 678–700, 2013.
D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, and D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic programming and optimal control. Athena scientific Belmont, MA, 1995, vol. 1, no. 2.
R. Atallah, C. Assi, and M. Khabbaz, “Deep reinforcement learningbased scheduling for roadside communication networks,” in 2017 15 th International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, ) DRL agent can learn directly from the environment. Hoc, and Wireless Networks (Wi Opt). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
S.Chinchali,P.Hu,T.Chu,M.Sharma,M.Bansal,R.Misra,M.Pavone, By setting different weights for throughput and fairness and S. Katti, “Cellular network traffic scheduling with deep reinin the reward function, the algorithm can converge to forcement learning,” in Thirty Second AAAI Conference on Artificial different points. However, it still has a risk to fall into Intelligence, 2018.
Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, F. R. Yu, and Z. Han, “Joint user scheduling local optimal points.
and content caching strategy for mobile edge networks using deep 2) Duallearning can help with getting rid of falling into reinforcement learning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on local optimum, but the training speed is relatively slow Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
J. Zhu, Y. Song, D. Jiang, and H. Song, “A new deep Qlearningbased due to ignoring expert knowledge.
transmission scheduling mechanism for the cognitive internet of things,” 3) If good expert knowledge exists, learning from it can IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2375–2385, 2018.
speed up the training procedure. M. Chu, H. Li, X. Liao, and S. Cui, “Reinforcement learning based multiaccess control and battery prediction with energy harvesting in IoT The results in this section suggest that instead of replacing systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2018.
the conventional PF scheduler by an AI scheduler, add one F. Kelly, “Charging and rate control for elastic traffic,” European transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 33–37, 1997.
is more feasible. This AI scheduler can learn online from the D. Tse, “Multiuser diversity in wireless networks,” in Wireless Commu PF scheduler. When number of UE s in the system becomes nications Seminar, Standford University, 2001.
large and the requirements of them becomes different, PF T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement scheduling is slow and inefficient. The AI scheduler can help learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
to make flexible decisions at one shot. Meanwhile, although M. Abadi et al., “Tensor Flow: Largescale machine learning on the generalization capability of NN s is proven to be strong in heterogeneous systems,” 2015, software available from tensorflow.org.
[Online]. Available: some cases, it is more robust to keep the adjustment of NN s R. K. Jain, D.-M. W. Chiu, and W. R. Hawe, “A quantitative measure according to the changing environment. The AI scheduler can of fairness and discrimination,” Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital be trained online when the PF scheduler is working in the Equipment Corporation, Hudson, MA, 1984.
system. The switch of PF and AI scheduler can be designed so that system performance is optimized and not influenced while the AI scheduler is training.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we investigate how DRL can help with solving the scheduling problem in cellular networks. Three learning methodologies are introduced while training the DRL agent.
Results show that, in the scenario of scheduling, learning from the expert knowledge can provide the best performance and the most efficient training. So, instead of replacing the conventional scheduling module, add an AI scheduler is more feasible.
For the future, more state and performance parameters can be considered. For instance, considering a finitelength buffer with nonfull buffer traffic and a delay tolerance for each packet, the packet loss due to buffer overflow and time expiration will surely influence the system performance. The DRL agent should take buffer and delay condition as parts of the state, and packet loss ratio as a component of reward calculation.