Divert More Attention to Vision Language Tracking Mingzhe ∗ Zhipeng ∗ Heng Liping † 1 Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas {mingzheguo, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn, , Abstract Relying on Transformer for complex visual feature learning, object tracking has witnessed the new standard for stateofthearts (SOTA s). However, this advancement accompanies by larger training data and longer training period, making tracking increasingly expensive. In this paper, we demonstrate that the Transformerreliance is not necessary and the pure Conv Nets are still competitive and even better yet more economical and friendly in achieving SOTA tracking. Our solution is to unleash the power of multimodal visionlanguage (VL) tracking, simply using Conv Nets. The essence lies in learning novel unifiedadaptive VL representations with our modality mixer (Moda Mixer) and asymmetrical Conv Net search. We show that our unifiedadaptive VL representation, learned purely with the Conv Nets, is a simple yet strong alternative to Transformer visual features, by unbelievably improving a CNN based Siamese tracker by 14.5% in SUC on challenging La SOT (50.7%→65.2%), even outperforming several Transformerbased SOTA trackers.
Besides empirical results, we theoretically analyze our approach to evidence its effectiveness. By revealing the potential of VL representation, we expect the community to divert more attention to VL tracking and hope to open more possibilities for future tracking beyond Transformer. Code and models will be released at Die/SOTS.
1 Introduction Transformer tracking recently receives a surge of research interests and becomes almost a necessity to achieve state- CNN Tracking Transformer Tracking oftheart (SOTA) performance . The success of Transformer trackers mainly attributes to attention that enables complex feature interactions. But, is this complex 10.9% gap attention the only way realizing SOTA tracking? Or in other words, is Transformer the only path to SOTA?
Current Best VL Tracker We answer no, and display a Transformerfree path using pure convolutional neural network (CNN). Different than complex interactions in visual feature by attention requiring more training data and longer training time, our : Comparison between CNN alternative is to explore simple interactions of multimodal, based and Transformerbased trackers i.e., vision and language, through CNN. In fact, language, on La SOT .
an equally important cue as vision, has been largely explored in visionrelated tasks, and is not new ∗Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.
2202 lu J 3 ]VC.sc[ 1 v 67010.7022:vi Xra to tracking. Prior works have exploited visionlanguage (VL) multimodal learning for improving tracking. However, the performance falls far behind current SOTA s. For instance on La SOT , the gap between current best VL tracker and recent Transformer tracker is absolute 10.9% in SUC (see Fig. 1). So, what is the bottleneck of VL tracking in achieving SOTA?
The devil is in VL representation. Feature representation has been shown to be crucial in improving tracking . Given two modalities of vision and language, the VL feature is desired to be unified and adaptive . The former property requires deep interaction of vision and language, while the latter needs VL feature to accommodate different scenarios of visual and linguistic information. However, in existing VL trackers, vision and language are treated independently and processed distantly until the final result fusion. Although this fusion may easily get two modalities connected, it does not accords with human learning procedure that integrates multisensory by various neuronsbeforecausalinference, resultinginalowerupperboundfor VL tracking. Besides, current VL trackers treat template and search branches as homoplasmic inputs, and adopt symmetrical feature learning structures for these two branches, inherited from typical visiononly Siamese tracking .
We argue the mixed modality may have different intrinsic nature than the pure vision modality, and thus requires a more flexible and general design for different signals.
Our solution. Having observed the above, we introduce a novel unifiedadaptive visionlanguage representation, aiming for SOTA VL tracking without using . Specifically, we first present modality mixer, or Moda Mixer, a conceptually simple but effective module for VL interaction.
Language is a highlevel representation and its class embedding can help distinguish targets of different categories (e.g., cat and dog) and meanwhile the attribute embedding (e.g., color, shape) provides strong prior to separate targets of same class (e.g., cars with different colors). The intuition is, channel features in vision representation also reveal semantics of objects . Inspired by this, Moda Mixer regards language representation as a selector to reweight different channels of visual features, enhancing targetspecific channels as well as suppressing irrelevant both intra- and interclass channels. The selected feature is then fused with the original feature, using a special asymmetrical design (analyzed later in experiments), to generate the final unified VL representation.
A set of Moda Mixers are installed in a typical CNN from shallow to deep, boosting robustness and discriminability of the unified VL representation at different semantic levels. Despite simplicity, Moda Mixer brings 6.9% gains over a pure CNN baseline (i.e., 50.7%→57.6%).
Despite huge improvement, the gap to SOTA Transformer tracker remains (57.6% v.s. 64.9%).
To mitigate the gap, we propose an asymmetrical searching strategy (ASS) to adapt the unified VL representation for improvements. Different from current VL tracking adopting symmetrical and fixed template and search branches as in visiononly Siamese tracking , we argue that the learning framework of mixed modality should be adaptive and not fixed. To this end, ASS borrows the idea from neural architecture search (NAS) to separately learn distinctive and asymmetrical networks for mixed modality in different branches and Moda Mixers. The asymmetrical architecture, to our best knowledge, is the first of its kind in matchingbased tracking. Note, although NAS has been adopted in matchingbased tracking , this method finds symmetrical networks for single modality. Differently, ASS is applied on mixed modality and the resulted architecture is symmetrical.
Moreover, the network searched in ASS avoids burdensome retraining on Image Net , enabling quick reproducibility of our work (only 0.625 GPU days with a single Ti). Our ASS is general and flexible, and together with Moda Mixer, it surprisingly shows additional 7.6% gains (i.e., 57.6%→65.2%), evidencing our argument and effectiveness of ASS.
Eventually, with the unifiedadaptive representation, we implement the first pure CNN based VL tracker that shows SOTA results comparable and even better than Transformerbased solutions, without bells and whistles. Specifically, we apply our method to a CNN baseline Siam CAR , and the resulted VL tracker VLT shows 65.2% SUC on La SOT while running at 43 FPS, SCAR unbelievably improving the baseline by 14.5% and outperforming SOTA Transformer trackers (see again Fig. 1). We observe similar improvements by our approach on other four benchmarks.
Besides empirical results, we provide theoretical analysis to evidence the effectiveness of our method.
2 Here we stress that we do not use Transformer for visual feature learning as in current Transformer trackers or for multimodal learning. We only use it in language embedding extraction (i.e., BERT ) 2 Vision Template Cls.
Head Language Moda Moda Moda Moda [[[ bbll aacc kk bb iicc yycc llee bb yy]]] Language Mixer Mixer Mixer Mixer aa mmaann oonn tthhee Match mmoouunnttaaiinn rrooaadd Model Moda Moda Moda Moda Mixer Mixer Mixer Mixer Reg.
Head Vision Language Representation Learning Localization Vision Search : The proposed visionlanguage tracking framework. The semantic information of language description is injected to vision from shallow to deep layers of the asymmetrical modeling architecture to learn unifiedadaptive visionlanguage representation.
Note that, our approach is general in improving visiononly trackers including Transformerbased ones. We show this by applying it to Trans T and the resulted tracker VLT shows 2.4% SUC TT gains (i.e., 64.9%→67.3%), evidencing its effectiveness and generality.
We are aware that one can certainly leverage the Transformer to learn a good (maybe better) VL representation for tracking, with larger data and longer training period. Different than this, our goal is to explore a cheaper way with simple architectures such as pure CNN for SOTA tracking performance and open more possibilities for future tracking beyond Transformer. In summary, our contributions are fourfold: (i) we introduce a novel unifiedadaptive visionlanguage representation for SOTA VL tracking; (ii) we propose the embarrassingly simple yet effective Moda Mixer for unified VL representation learning; (iii) we present ASS to adapt mixed VL representation for better tracking and (iv) using pure CNN architecture, we achieve SOTA results on multiple benchmarks .
2 Related Work Visual Tracking. Tracking has witnessed great progress in the past decades. Particularly, Siamese tracking , that aims to learn a generic matching function, is a representative branch and has revolutionized with numerous extensions . Recently, Transformer has been introduced to Siamese tracking for better interactions of visual features and greatly pushed the standard of stateoftheart performance . From a different perspective than using complex Transformer, we explore multimodal with simple CNN to achieve SOTA tracking.
Vision Language Tracking. Natural language contains highlevel semantics and has been leveraged to foster visionrelated tasks including tracking . The work first introduces linguistic description to tracking and shows that language enhances the robustness of visionbased method. Most recently, SNLT integrates linguistic information into Siamese tracking by fusing results respectively obtained by vision and language. Different from these VL trackers that regard vision and language as independent cues with weak connections only at result fusion, we propose Moda Mixer to unleash the power of VL tracking by learning unified VL representation.
NAS for Tracking. Neural architecture search (NAS) aims at finding the optimal design of deep network architectures and has been introduced to tracking . Light Track tends to search a lightweight backbone but is computationally demanding (about 40 V 100 GPU days). Auto Match uses DARTS to find better matching networks for Siamese tracking. All these methods leverage NAS for visiononly tracking and search a symmetrical Siamese architecture.
Differently, our work searches the network for multimodal tracking and tries to find a more general and flexible asymmetrical twostream counterpart. In addition, our search pipeline only takes 0.625 Ti GPU days, which is much more resourcefriendly.
3 3 Unified Adaptive Vision Language Tracking This section details our unifiedadaptive visionlanguage (VL) tracking as shown in Fig. 2. In specific, we first describe the proposed modality mixer for generating unified multimodal representation and then asymmetrical network which searches for learning adaptive VL representation. Afterwards, we illustrate the proposed tracking framework, followed by theoretical analysis of our method.
3.1 Modality Mixer for Unified Representation The essence of multimodal learning is a simple and effective modality fusion module. As discussed before, existing VL trackers simply use a later fusion way, in which different modalities are treated independently and processed distantly until merging their final results . Despite the effectiveness to some extent, the complementarity of different modalities in representation learning is largely unexplored, which may impede the multimodal learning to unleash its power for VL tracking. In this work, we propose the modality mixer (dubbed Moda Mixer) to demonstrate a compact way to learn a unified visionlanguage representation for tracking.
Moda Mixer considers language representation e g Linear Block_ a ASS as selector to reweight channels of vision fea- u g tures. In specific, given the language descrip- n a L tion with N words of a video 3, a language 1d For next Moda Mixer model is adopted to abstract the sentence to semantic features with size of (N + 2) × d.
n The extra “2” denotes the “[CLS][SEP]” charac- o i s ters in language model processing (see for i V Block_ ASS more details). Notably, descriptions for different HWC videos may contain various length N. To ensure : Illustration of the Moda Mixer.
the Moda Mixer applicable for all videos, we first average the features for all words along sequence length dimension “(N+2)” to generate a unique language representation f ∈ R 1×d for each description. Then a linear layer is followed to align l the channel number of f with the corresponding vision feature f ∈ RH×W×C. Channel selector l v is expressed as Hadamard product operator, which pointwisely multiplies language representation (1 × C) to embedding of each spatial position in the vision feature f . Finally, a residual connection v between the mixed feature f and vision feature f is conducted to avoid losing informative vision m v details. In a nutshell, the Moda Mixer can be formulated as, f = Block (Linear(f ) (cid:12) f ) + Block (f ), (1) m ASS l v ASS v where (cid:12) denotes Hadamard product, Linear is a linear projection layer with weight matrix size of d × C for channel number alignment, and Block indicates postprocessing block before residual ASS connection. Please note that, to enable adaptive feature modeling for different modalities, we search different Block to process features before and after fusion (see Sec. 3.2 for more details). The ASS proposed Moda Mixer is illustrated in Fig. 3. Akin to channel attention , the highlevel semantics in language representation dynamically enhance targetspecific channels in vision features, and meanwhile suppress the responses of distractors belonging to both inter- and intraclasses.
3.2 Asymmetrical Search for Adaptive Vision Language Representation Besides the fusion module, the other crucial key for visionlanguage tracking is how to construct the basic modeling structure. The simplest strategy is to inherit a symmetrical Siamese network from visionbased tracking (e.g., ), as in current VL trackers . But the performance gap still remains if using this manner, which is mostly blamed on the neglect of the different intrinsic nature between VL based multimodal and visiononly single modality. To remedy this, we propose 3 The language description in tracking is generated only by the initial target object in the first frame.
4 : The asymmetrical architecture learned by ASS. is the stem convolution layer. ( ) represents the basic ASS unit, where the first three ones indicate Shuffle block with kernel sizes of (3,5,7), respectively, and the last one denotes a Shuffle Xception block with kernel size of 3.
Moda Moda Moda Moda Stem Mixer Mixer Mixer Mixer Template Search an asymmetrical searching strategy (dubbed ASS) to learn an adaptive modeling structure for pairing with Moda Mixer.
The spirits of network search are originated from the field of Neural Architecture Search (NAS). We adopt a popular NAS model, in particular the singlepath oneshot method SPOS , for searching the optimal structure of our purpose. Although SPOS has been utilized for tracking , our work significantly differs from it from two aspects: 1) Our ASS is tailored for constructing an asymmetrical twostream network for multimodal tracking, while is designed to find a symmetrical Siamese network for visiononly singlemodality tracking. Besides, we search layers both in the backbone network and the postprocessing Block in the Moda Mixer (see Eq. 1); 2) Our ASS reuses the ASS pretrained supernet from SPOS, which avoids the burdensome retraining on Image Net (both for the supernet and found subnet) and thus reduces the time complexity of our search pipeline to 1/64 of that in Light Track (i.e., 0.625 Ti GPU days v.s. 40 V 100 GPU days). Due to limited space, please refer to appendix for more details and comparison of our ASS and .
The search space and search strategy of ASS are kept consistent with the original SPOS . In particular, the search pipeline is formulated as, W = argmin E [L (N(a,W(a)))], (2) A a∼Γ(A) train W a∗ = argmax SUC (N(a,W (a))), (3) val A a∈A where A represents the architecture search space of the network N, a is a sample from A and W denotes the corresponding network weights. Notably, the network N includes three components N = {ϕ ,ϕ ,ϕ }, where each indicates backbone for the template branch ϕ , backbone for the t s m t search branch ϕ and layers in the Moda Mixer ϕ . The whole pipeline consists of training supernet s m on tracking datasets via random sampling Γ from search space A (Eq. 2) and finding the optimal subnet via evolutionary algorithms (Eq. 3). The SUC (success score) on validation data is used as rewards of evolutionary algorithms. Tab. 1 demonstrates the searched asymmetrical networks in our VL tracking. For more details of ASS, we kindly refer readers to appendix or .
3.3 Tracking Framework With the proposed Moda Mixer and the searched asymmetrical networks, we construct a new visionlanguage tracking framework, as shown in Fig. 2 and Tab. 1. Our framework is matchingbased tracking. Both template and search backbone networks contain 4 stages with the maximum stride of 8, the chosen blocks of each stage are denoted with different colors in Tab. 1. Moda Mixer is integrated into each stage of the template and search networks to learn informative mixed representation. It is worth noting that, the asymmetry is revealed in not only the design of backbone networks, but also the Moda Mixer. Each Moda Mixer shares the same metastructure as in Fig. 3, but comprises different postprocessing layers Block to allow adaption to different semantic levels (i.e., network depth) ASS and input signals (i.e., template and search, purevision and mixed feature in each Moda Mixer). With the learned unifiedadaptive VL representations from the template and search branches, we perform feature matching and target localization, the same as in our baseline.
5 3.4 A Theoretical Explanation This section presents a theoretical explanation of our method, following the analysis in . Based on the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) principle , the objective of representation learning is to find better network parameters θ by minimizing the empirical risk, i.e., n 1 (cid:88) min rˆ(θ ) (cid:44) L(X ,y ;θ ) s.t. θ ∈ F. (4) M i i M M n i=1 where L denotes loss function, M represents the modality set, n indicates sample number, X = i {x 1,x 2...x |M| } is the input mutimodal signal, y is training label, and F demotes optimization space i i i i of θ. Given the empirical risk rˆ(θ ), its corresponding population risk is defined as, M r(θ ) = E [rˆ(θ )] (5) M (X ,y )∼D M i i train Following , the population risk is adopted to measure the learning quality. Then the latent representation quality is defined as, η(θ) = inf [r(θ) − r(θ∗)] (6) θ∈F where ∗ represents the optimal case, inf indicates the best achievable population risk. With the empirical Rademacher complexity R , we restate the conclusion in with our definition.
ˆ ˆ (). Assuming we have produced the empirical risk minimizers θ and θ , training M S with the |M| and |S| modalities separately (|M| > |S|). Then, for all 1 > δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ: 2 (cid:114) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) 4 C 2 ln(2/δ) ˆ ˆ r θ − r θ ≤ γ (M,S) + 8 LR (F ) + √ + 2 C (7) M S D n M n n where (cid:112) γ (M,S) (cid:44) η(θ ˆ ) − η(θ ˆ ) R (F ) ∼ Complexity(F )/n (8) D M S n M M γ (M,S) computes the quality difference learned from multiple modalities M and single modality D S with dataset D. defines an upper bound of the population risk training with different number of modalities, which proves that more modalities could potentially enhance the representation quality. Furthermore, the Rademacher complexity R (F) is proportional to the network n complexity, which demonstrates that heterogeneous network would theoretically rise the upper (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) ˆ ˆ bound of r θ −r θ , and also exhibits that our asymmetrical design has larger optimiza M S tion space when learning with |M| modalities compared to |S| modalities (|M| > |S|). The proof is beyond our scoop, and please refer to for details.
4 .1 Implementation Details We apply our method to both CNN based Siam CAR (dubbed VLT ) and Transformerbased SCAR Trans T (dubbed VLT ). The matching module and localization head are inherited from the TT baseline tracker without any modifications.
Searching for VLT. The proposed ASS aims to find a more flexible modeling structure for visionlanguage tracking (VLT). Taking VLT as example, the supernet from SPOS is used SCAR as feature extractor to replace the Res Net in Siam CAR. We train the trackers with supernet using training splits of COCO , Imagenet VID , Imagenet DET , Youtube BB , k , La SOT and K for 5 epochs, where each epoch contains 1.2 × 106 templatesearch pairs. Once finishing supernet training, evolutionary algorithms as in SPOS is applied to search for optimal subnet and finally obtains VLT . The whole search pipeline SCAR consumes 15 hours on a single Ti GPU. The search process of VLT is similar to TT VLT . We present more details in the appendix due to space limitation.
: Stateoftheart comparisons on La SOT , La SOT , K , k Ext and LANG ( L) . Trans T and Siam CAR are baselines of the proposed VLT TT and VLT , respectively. All metrics of performance are in % in tables unless otherwise specified.
SCAR La SOT La SOT K k L Type Method Ext SUC P SUC P SUC P AO SR SR SUC P 0.5 0.75 Siam .8 68.4 - - 52.3 52.8 64.9 72.8 59.7 70.0 89.4 Pr Di .8 60.8 - - 47.0 45.9 63.4 73.8 54.3 69.5 89.5 Auto .3 59.9 37,6 43.0 47.2 43.5 65.2 76.6 54.3 71.6 93.2 .0 56.6 - - 38.4 37.7 61.1 72.1 47.3 68.0 92.1 .4 - - - 44.9 43.5 63.6 75.1 51.5 - - .5 50.5 37.6 43.0 40.1 39.2 55.6 63.4 40.2 67.6 82.4 CNN based Siam RPN++ 49.6 49.1 34.0 39.6 41.3 41.2 51.7 61.6 32.5 63.8 82.6 .5 42.5 27.5 32.0 - - - - - - - Siam .6 33.9 23.0 26.9 29.5 28.6 34.8 35.3 9.8 58.7 79.2 .4 30.1 22.0 24.0 - - 31.6 30.9 11.1 - - Siam .7 51.0 33.9 41.0 35.3 38.4 56.9 67.0 41.5 68.8 89.1 .0 57.6 26.2 30.0 27.6 41.9 43.3 50.6 22.1 66.6 80.4 CNNVL VLT (Ours) 65.2 69.1 44.7 51.6 49.8 51.0 61.4 72.4 52.3 73.9 89.8 SCAR .4 71.2 47.8 55.1 - - 68.0 77.7 62.3 69.6 91.4 Transbased Tr Di .9 66.3 - - - - 67.1 77.7 58.3 70.5 92.5 Trans T 64.9 69.0 44.8 52.5 50.7 51.7 67.1 76.8 60.9 70.8 91.2 Trans VL VLT (Ours) 67.3 72.1 48.4 55.9 53.1 53.3 69.4 81.1 64.5 76.4 93.1 TT Optimizing VLT and VLT . The training protocol of VLT and VLT follows the SCAR TT SCAR TT corresponding baselines Siam CAR and Trans T . Notably, for each epoch, half training pairs come from datasets without language annotations (i.e., COCO , Imagenet VID , Imagenet DET , Youtube BB ). The language representation is set as 0 tensor or visual pooling feature under this circumstances (discussed in Tab. 4)4.
4.2 Stateoftheart Comparison Tab. 2 presents the results and comparisons of our trackers with other SOTA s on La SOT , La SOT , K , LANG and K . The proposed VLT and Ext SCAR VLT run at 43/35 FPS on a single Ti GPU, respectively. Compared with the speeds of TT baseline trackers Siam CAR /Trans T with 52/32 FPS, the computation cost of our method is small. Moreover, our VLT outperforms Trans T in terms of both accuracy and speed.
TT Compared with Siam CAR , VLT achieves considerable SUC gains of 14.5%/10.8%/14.5% SCAR on La SOT/La SOT / K, respectively, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed VL Ext tracker. Notably, our VLT outperforms the current best VL tracker SNLT for 11.2%/18.5% SCAR on La SOT/La SOT , showing that the unifiedadaptive visionlanguage representation is more Ext robust for VL tracking and is superior to simply fusing tracking results of different modalities. The advancement of our method is preserved across different benchmarks. What surprises us more is that the CNN based VLT is competitive and even better than recent vision Transformerbased SCAR approaches. For example, VLT outperforms Trans T on La SOT and meanwhile runs faster SCAR (43 FPS v.s. 32 FPS) and requires less training pairs (2.4 × 107 v.s. 3.8 × 107). By applying our method to Trans T, the new tracker VLT improves the baseline to 67.3% in SUC with 2.4% gains TT on La SOT while being faster, showing its generality.
4.3 Componentwise Ablation We analyze the influence of each component in our method to show the effectiveness and rationality of the proposed Moda Mixer and ASS. The ablation experiments are conducted on VLT , and SCAR results are presented in Tab. 3. By directly applying the Moda Mixer on the baseline Siam k provides simple descriptions for object/motion/major/root class, e.g., “dove, walking, bird, animal”, in each video. We concatenate these words to obtain a pseudo language description.
7 : Ablation on Moda Mixer and asymmetrical searching strategy (ASS).
La SOT K # Method Moda Mixer ASS SUC P P SUC P P Norm Norm (cid:172) Baseline - - 50.7 60.0 51.0 35.3 43.6 38.4 √ (cid:173) VLT - 57.6 65.8 61.1 41.5 49.2 43.2 SCAR √ (cid:174) VLT - 52.1 59.8 50.6 40.7 47.2 40.2 SCAR √ √ (cid:175) .2 74.9 69.1 48.3 55.2 46.6 SCAR : Comparing different strategies to handle training videos without language annotation.
La SOT La SOT K k L Ext Method Setting SUC P SUC P SUC P AO SR SR SUC P 0.5 0.75 0 tensor 65.2 69.1 41.2 47.5 48.3 46.6 61.4 72.4 52.3 72.7 88.8 VLT SCAR template 63.9 67.9 44.7 51.6 49.8 51.1 61.0 70.8 52.2 73.9 89.8 : Evaluating different settings on La SOT: (a) the influence of symmetrical and our asymmetrical design, (b) adopting fixed Shuffle Net block or searching the postprocessing block in Moda Mixer, and (c) removing language description or using caption generated by during inference.
(a) (b) (c) Settings SUC P Settings SUC P Settings SUC P symmetrical 60.0 61.7 Shuffle Moda .1 62.2 w/o. language 53.4 54.6 asymmetrical 63.9 67.9 NASM oda .9 67.9 Pse. language 51.6 53.4 (“Res +Moda Mixer”), it obtains SUC gains of 6.9% on La SOT ( (cid:173)v.s.(cid:172) ). This verifies that the unified VL representation effectively improves tracking robustness. One interesting observation is that ASS improves visiononly baseline for 1.4% percents on La SOT ( (cid:174)v.s.(cid:172) ), but when equipping with Moda Mixer, it surprisingly further brings 7.6% SUC gains ( (cid:175)v.s.(cid:173) ), which shows the complementarity of multimodal representation learning (Moda Mixer) and the proposed ASS.
4.4 Further Analysis Dealing with videos without language description during training. As mentioned above, language annotations are not provided in several training datasets (e.g., YTBBB ox ). We design two strategies to handle that. One is to use “0 tensor” as language embedding, and the other is to replace the language embedding with visual features which are generated by pooling template feature in the bounding box. As shown in Tab. 4, the two strategies perform competitively, but the one with visual feature is slightly better in average. Therefore, in the following, we take VLT trained by SCAR replacing language embedding with template visual embedding as the baseline for further analysis.
Symmetrical or Asymmetrical? The proposed asymmetrical searching strategy is essential for achieving an adaptive visionlanguage representation. As illustrated in Tab. 5 a, we experiment by searching for a symmetrical network (including both backbone and Block in the Moda Mixer), ASS but it is inferior to the asymmetrical counterpart for 3.9%/6.2% of success rate (SUC) and precision (P) on La SOT , respectively, which empirically proves our argument.
Asymmetry in Moda Mixer. The asymmetry is used in not only the backbone network, but also the Moda Mixer. In our work, the postprocessing layers for different signals (visual and mixed features) are decided by ASS, which enables the adaption at both semantic levels (i.e., network depth) and different input signals (i.e., template and search, purevision and mixed feature in each Moda Mixer). As in Tab. 5 b, when replacing the postprocessing layers with a fixed Shuffle Net block from SPOS (i.e., inheriting structure and weights from the last block in each backbone stage), 8 S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 n e r o o i s c u S f . r x e a t M f a S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 n o i e s r u o f c e S r . o n f i e M b (a) Channels visualization with max/min selection scores (b) Activation maps : (a) feature channel with maximum/minimum (top/bottom) selection scores from Moda Mixer in stage 14. (b) activation map before/after (top/bottom) multimodal fusion in Moda Mixer.
the performance drops from 63.9% to 59.1% in SUC on La SOT. This reveals that the proposed ASS is important for building a better VL learner.
No/Pseudo description during inference. VL trackers require the first frame of a video is annotated with a language description. One may wonder that what if there is no language description? Tab. 5 c presents the results by removing the description and using that generated with an recent advanced imagecaption method (in ). The results show that, without language description, performance heavily degrades (65.2% → 53.4% SUC on La SOT), verifying that the highlevel semantics in language do help in improving robustness. Even though, the performance is still better than the visiononly baseline. Surprisingly, when using the generated description, it doesn’t show promising results (51.6%), indicating that it is still challenging to generate accurate caption in realworld cases and noisy caption even brings negative effects to the model.
Channel selection by Moda Mixer. Moda Mixer translates the language description to a channel selector to reweight visual features. As shown in Fig. 4, the channel activation maps with maximum selection scores always correspond to the target, while the surrounding distractors are successfully assigned with minimum scores (Fig. 4 (a)-bottom). Besides, with multimodal fusion (or channel selection), the network can enhance the response of target and meanwhile suppress the distractors (see Fig. 4 (b)). This evidences our argument that language embedding can identify semantics in visual feature channels and effectively select useful information for localizing targets. More visualization results are presented in appendix due to limited space.
5 Conclusion In this work, we explore a different path to achieve SOTA tracking without complex Transformer, i.e., multimodal VL tracking. The essence is a unifiedadaptive VL representation, learned by our Moda Mixer and asymmetrical networks. In experiments, our approach surprisingly boosts a pure CNN based Siamese tracker to achieve competitive or even better performances compared to recent SOTA s. Besides, we provide an theoretical explanation to evidence the effectiveness of our method.
We hope that this work inspires more possibilities for future tracking beyond Transformer.
Acknowledgments This work is cosupervised by Prof. Liping Jing and Dr. Zhipeng Zhang.
9 A Appendix The appendix presents additional details of our tracker in terms of design and experiments, as follows.
• A.1 Volume of Language Annotated Training Data We analyze how the volume of languageannotated training data affects tracking performance.
• A.2 Different Language Models We analyze and compare different language embedding models (i.e., BERT and ) in our method.
• A.3 Details of The Proposed Asymmetrical Searching Strategy (ASS) We present more details about the pipeline of our proposed ASS.
• A.4 Comparison of ASS and Light Track We show efficiency comparison of our ASS and another NAS based tracker Light Track .
• A.5 Visualization of Tracking Result and Failure Case We visualize the tracking results and analyze a failure case of our tracker.
• A.6 Activation Analysis of Different Language Descriptions We study the impact of different language descriptions on tracking performance by visualizing their activation maps.
• A.7 Attributebased Performance Analysis We conductattributebased performance analysis on La SOT , andthe resultsdemonstrate the robustness of our tracker in various complex scenarios.
A.1 Volume of Language Annotated Training Data Languageannotated data is crucial for our proposed tracker in learning the robust visionlanguage representations. We analyze the influence of training with different volumes of languageannotated data and the results are presented in Tab. 6 a. The default setting in the manuscript is noted as “100%”.
For settings of “50%” and “75%”, the reduced part is filled with the data without language annotation, which keeps the whole training data volume. It shows that as the languageannotated training pairs reduced, the performance on La SOT gradually decreases (63.9% → 61.8% → 58.9% in SUC), demonstrating that more languageannotated data helps improve model capacity.
A.2 Different Language Models As described in Sec. 3.1 of the manuscript, the language model of BERT is adopted to abstract the semantics of the sentence, which directly relates to the learning of visionlanguage representation.
To show the influence of different language models, we compare the results of using BERT and , as shown in Tab. 6 b. An interesting finding is that even decreases the performances, which is discrepant with recent studies in natural language processing. One possible reason is that the bidirectional learning strategy in BERT can better capture the context information of a sentence than the selfregression in .
(a) (b) Settings SUC (%) P (%) Settings SUC (%) P (%) 50% 58.9 61.4 59.3 62.3 75% 61.8 64.9 .9 67.9 100% 63.9 67.9 10 A.3 Details of The Proposed Asymmetrical Searching Strategy (ASS) As mentioned in Sec. 3.2 of the manuscript, ASS is designed to adapt the mixed modalities for different branches by simultaneously searching the asymmetrical network N = {ϕ ,ϕ ,ϕ }. The t s m pipeline of ASS consists of two stages. The first stage is pretraining to search architecture and the second one is to retrain it for our VL tracking, as summarized in Alg. 1.
Algorithm for Asymmetrical Searching Strategy.
1: /* Search */ 2: Input: Network N, search space A, max iteration T , random sampling Γ, Train dataset: D = {X ,y }N , X = {xv,xl (optional)}, train n n n=1 n n n M Val dataset: D = {X ,y } , val m m m=1 For videos without language annotation: xl =“0 tensor” or “templateembedding”.
3: Initialize: Initialize the network parameters θ .
N 4: for i = 1 : T do 5: for n = 1 : N do 6: if language annotation exists then 7: fl = BERT(xl ); n n 8: else if xl =“0 tensor” then n 9: fl = zeros_like[BERT(xl )]; // Default setting without language annotation n n 10: else if xl =“templateembedding” then n 11: fl = ROI(xv); // Robust setting without language annotation n n 12: end if 13: a = Γ(A), p = N(xv,fl;a); n n n 14: end for 15: Update the network parameters θ with gradient descent: N 16: θa ← θa − α∂ 1 (cid:80)N L(p ,y ;θa )/∂θa ; N N N n=1 n n N N 17: end for 18: a = Evolutionary Architecture Search(A,D ;θ ); best val N 19: Initialize: Initialize the network parameters θ .
N 20: while not converged do 21: for n = 1 : N do 22: line 6 - 12 23: p = N(xv,fl;a ); n n n best 24: end for 25: Update the network parameters θ with gradient descent: N θ a best ← θ a best − α∂ 1 (cid:80)N L(p ,y ;θ a best)/∂θ a best; N N N n=1 n n N N 26: end while 27: Output: network parameters θ , a .
N best 28: /* Retrain */ 29: Train the searched networks θ , a ; N best 30: /* Inference */ 31: Track the target by y = argmaxp.
The pretraining stage (line 318 in Alg. 1) contains four steps: 1) ASS first initializes the network parameter θ of N. Concretely, ϕ and ϕ reuse the pretrained supernet of SPOS , while ϕ N t s m copies the weight of the last layer in ϕ and ϕ . This reduces the tedious training on Image Net t s and enables quick reproducibility of our work; 2) The language model processes the annotated sentence xl to get corresponding representation fl. If the language annotations are not provided, two different strategies are designed to handle these cases (i.e., “0 tensor” or “templateembedding”, illustrated in Sec. 4.4 and Tab. 5 c of the manuscript); 3) Then, θ is trained for T iterations. For N each iteration, a subnet a is randomly sampled from search space A by the function Γ and outputs 11 the predictions p. The corresponding parameters of a would be updated by gradient descent; 4) After pretraining, Evolutionary Architecture Search is performed to find the optimal subnet a . The best rewarding for evolutionary search is the SUC (success score) on validation data D . The retraining val stage (line 1927 in Alg. 1) is to optimize the searched subnet a following the training pipeline of best baseline trackers .
Tab. 7 displays the detailed configurations of the searched asymmetrical architecture, providing a complement to Tab. 1 in the manuscript.
Stem Output Convolution Block Block Block Block Convolution Layer Name ASS Moda Mixer ASS Moda Mixer ASS Moda Mixer ASS Moda Mixer Block ×3 ×3 ×7 ×3 Block P =2 P =2 P =1 P =2 P =1 P =1 P =1 P =1 P =1 P =1 Parameter in 1 2 3 4 out C =16 C =64 C =64 C =160 C =160 C =320 C =320 C =640 C =640 C =256 in 1 2 3 4 out Output Size H × W H × W H × W H × W H × W H × W 2 2 4 4 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 A.4 Comparison of ASS and Light Track Despite greatly boosting the tracking performance, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) brings complicated training processes and large computation costs. Considering the complexity, we ease unnecessary steps of ASS to achieve a better tradeoff between training time and performance. Taking another NAS based tracker (i.e., Light Track ) as the comparison, we demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed ASS.
As illustrated in Tab. 8, NAS based trackers usually need to first pretrain the supernet on Image Net to initialize the parameters, which results in high time complexity in training. Light Track even trains the backbone network on Image Net twice (i.e., the 1 st and 4 th steps), which heavily increases the time complexity. By contrast, our ASS avoids this cost by reusing the pretrained supernet from SPOS, which is much more efficient.
Steps Light Track ASS in VLT (Ours) Pretraining backbone supernet Reusing trained backbone 1 st step on Image Net supernet of SPOS Training tracking supernet Training tracking supernet 2 nd step on tracking datasets on tracking datasets Searching with evolutionary Searching with evolutionary 3 rd step algorithm on tracking supernet algorithm on tracking supernet Retraining searched backbone Reusing trained backbone 4 th step subset on Image Net supernet of SPOS Finetuning searched tracking Finetuning searched tracking 5 th step subset on tracking datasets subset on tracking datasets Network searching cost ∼40 Tesla V 100 GPU days ∼3 Ti GPU days A.5 Visualization of Tracking Result and Failure Case.
As shown in Fig. 5, the proposed VLT delivers more robust tracking under deformation, SCAR occlusion (the first row) and interference with similar objects (the second row). It demonstrates the effectiveness of learned multimodal representation, especially in complex environments. The third row shows the failure case of our tracker. In this case, the target is fully occluded for about 100 frames and distracted by similar objects, leading to ineffectiveness of our tracker in learning helpful 12 : The first two rows show the success of our tracker in locating target object in complex scenarios, while the third row exhibits a failure case of our method when the target is occluded for a long period (with around 100 frames).
information. A possible solution to deal with this is to apply a global searching strategy, and we leave this to future work.
13 A.6 Activation Analysis of Different Language Descriptions Language description provides highlevel semantics to enhance the targetspecific channels while suppressing the targetirrelevant ones. As presented in Fig. 6, we show the effect of different words to evidence that language helps to identify targets. The first row shows that the VLT without SCAR language description focuses on two birds (red areas), interfered by the same object class. When introducing the word “bird”, the response of the similar object is obviously suppressed. With a more detailed “black bird”, the responses of distractors almost disappear, which reveals that more specific annotation can help the tracker better locate the target area. Furthermore, we also try to track the target with only environmental description, i.e., “standing on the ground”. The result in column 5 shows that the background is enhanced while the target area is suppressed. The comparison evidences that the language description of object class is crucial for the tracker to distinguish the target from the background clutter, while the mere description of the environment (the fourth column) may introduce interference instead. The last column shows the activation maps with full description, where the tracker can precisely locate the target, demonstrating the effectiveness of the learned unifiedadaptive visionlanguage representation.
A.7 Attributebased Performance Analysis Fig. 7 presents the attributebased evaluation on La SOT . We compare VLT and VLT SCAR TT with representative stateoftheart algorithms, as shown in Fig. 7 a. It shows that our methods are more effective than other competing trackers on most attributes. Fig. 7 b shows the ablation on different components of VLT , which evidences that the integration of Moda Mixer and ASS is SCAR necessary for a powerful VL tracker.
(a) Comparison with different trackers. (b) Ablation on components of VLT .
SCAR : AUC scores of different attributes on the La SOT.
References Massih R Amini, Nicolas Usunier, and Cyril Goutte. Learning from multiple partially observed viewsan application to multilingual text categorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2009. 6 Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and Lei Zhang. Bottomup and topdown attention for image captioning and visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018. 3 Stephanie Badde, Fangfang Hong, and Michael S Landy. Causal inference and the evolution of opposite neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2021. 2 Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2002. 6 14 Luca Bertinetto, Jack Valmadre, João F Henriques, Andrea Vedaldi, and Philip H S Torr. Fullyconvolutional siamese networks for object tracking. In European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, 2016. 3, 4, 7 Goutam Bhat, Martin Danelljan, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Know your surroundings: Exploiting scene information for object tracking. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2020. 7 Xin Chen, Bin Yan, Jiawen Zhu, Dong Wang, Xiaoyun Yang, and Huchuan Lu. Transformer tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 12 Zedu Chen, Bineng Zhong, Guorong Li, Shengping Zhang, and Rongrong Ji. Siamese box adaptive network for visual tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020. 3 Yutao Cui, Jiang Cheng, Limin Wang, and Gangshan Wu. Mixformer: Endtoend tracking with iterative mixed attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022. 1, 2, 3 Martin Danelljan, Goutam Bhat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Michael Felsberg. ECO: Efficient convolution operators for tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017. 7 Martin Danelljan, Goutam Bhat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Michael Felsberg. ATOM: Accurate tracking by overlap maximization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019. 7 Martin Danelljan, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Probabilistic regression for visual tracking.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 2021. 7 Heng Fan, Liting Lin, Fan Yang, Peng Chu, Ge Deng, Sijia Yu, Hexin Bai, Yong Xu, Chunyuan Liao, and Haibin Ling. La SOT: A highquality benchmark for largescale single object tracking.