Evolution of Transfer Learning in Natural Language Processing Aditya Malte † Pratik Ratadiya † Dept. of Computer Engineering, Dept. of Computer Engineering, Pune Institute of Computer Technology, Pune Institute of Computer Technology, Maharashtra, India. Maharashtra, India.
Abstract—In this paper, we present a study of the recent summarization were achieved through models such as the advancements which have helped bring Transfer Learning to Transformer and Seq 2 Seq architectures.
NLP through the use of semi-supervised training. We discuss Two important breakthroughs that provided significant imcutting-edge methods and architectures such as BERT, GPT, petus to the NLP and NLG domain were the arrival of ELM o, ULMF it among others. Classically, tasks in natural Transfer Learning and rapid improvements in the performance language processing have been performed through rule-based and statistical methodologies. However, owing to the vast nature of Language models. We† feel it necessary to discuss these of natural languages these methods do not generalise well and concepts before moving further: failed to learn the nuances of language. Thus machine learning algorithms such as Naive Bayes and decision trees coupled with A. Language Modeling traditional models such as Bag-of-Words and N-grams were used Language modeling is an NLP task where the model has to usurp this problem. Eventually, with the advent of advanced recurrent neural network architectures such as the LSTM, we to predict the succeeding word given the previous words were able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in several of the sequence as context. This task requires the language natural language processing tasks such as text classification model(LM) to learn the nuances and inter-dependencies among and machine translation. We talk about how Transfer Learning the various words of the language. Standard benchmark has brought about the well-known Image Net moment for NLP.
datasets for the language modeling tasks include the wikitext Several advanced architectures such as the Transformer and its variants have allowed practitioners to leverage knowledge gained dataset, the Book Corpus dataset [1] and the 1 B word [2] from unrelated task to drastically fasten convergence and provide benchmark. Perplexity is generally used as a metric to evaluate better performance on the target task. This survey represents the performance of language models. Perplexity is defined as an effort at providing a succinct yet complete understanding of follows: the recent advances in natural language processing using deep (cid:118) (cid:117) N learning in with a special focus on detailing transfer learning (cid:117)(cid:89) 1 and its potential advantages.
N(cid:116) (1) P(w |w ...w ) Index Terms—Natural language processing, transfer learning, i=1 i 1 i−1 self attention, language modeling Given a sequence of N words of the corpus, w w ...w , 1 2 N P(w |w ...w ) is the probability assigned by the language I. INTRODUCTION i 1 i−1 model to word w given w preceding words of the sei i−1 Natural Language processing - the science of how to quence.
make computers effectively process natural text- has recently A lower perplexity generally signals towards a better perwitnessed rapid advancements thanks to increased processing forming language model as it indicates a lower entropy in the power, data and better algorithms. It forms the heart of several generated text. Language modeling is used for tasks such as use cases such as opinion mining, conversational agents and next word prediction, text auto-completion and checking linmachine translation among others. Traditionally, NLP tasks guistic acceptability. The concept of semi-supervised learning were achieved through rule-based systems, in essence, a set in NLP allows us to understand why and how language modof manually crafted rules that determined the behaviour of eling has played a fundamental role in various architectures the system. Examples include rule-based machine translation that have allowed for transfer learning in NLP.
where linguists iteratively framed new rules to make the translations more accurate. B. Transfer Learning However, owing to the vast and heuristic nature of natural Traditionally, NLP models were trained after random initiallanguage, machine learning gained a stronger ground in perization of the model parameters(also called weights). Transfer forming NLP tasks. Machine learning models such as SVM, Learning, a technique where a neural network is fine-tuned on Naive Bayes and random forests found use in tasks such as a specific task after being pre-trained on a general task allowed sentiment analysis, spam detection and hate speech detection.
deep learning models to converge faster and with relatively On the other hand, Natural Language Generation(NLG) tasks such as machine translation, question-answering, abstractive †Equal contribution of both the authors 9102 tc O 61 ]LC.sc[ 1 v 07370.0191:vi Xra lower requirements of fine-tuning data. Historically, transfer series forecasting. These models suffered from an inability to learning has been mainly associated with the fine-tuning of retain information throughout the sequence and treated each deep neural networks trained on the Image Net dataset [3] for input independently. In essence, the lack of a memory element other computer vision tasks. However, with recent advances in precluded these models from performing well on sequence natural language processing, it has become possible to perform modelling tasks.
transfer learning in this domain as well. Recurrent Neural Networks [4] or RNN s attempted to redress In this survey, we seek to discuss the recent strides made in this shortcoming by introducing loops within the network, thus Transfer learning, Language modeling and natural language allowing the retention of information.
generations through advancements in algorithms and techniques. Transfer learning can be used for applications where there is lack of a large training set. The target dataset should ideally be related to the pre-training dataset for effective transfer learning. This type of training is generally referred to as semi-supervised training where the neural network is first trained as a language model on a general dataset followed by supervised training on a labelled training dataset Fig. 2: Recurrent Neural Network [7] thus establishing a dependence of supervised fine-tuning on unsupervised language modeling.
The paper is structured as follows- Section II of the pah = φ(Wh + Ux + b) (2) t t−1 t per elaborates on the various algorithms and architectures that have serve as a base on which more advanced models As shown in Fig.2 and the corresponding equation, the have been built upon. Section III provides information about current hidden state of the neuron can be modelled as a the transformer architecture which drastically improved the function of the hidden state of the previous neuron s , the t−1 prospects of using transfer learning for NLP tasks. Section IV current input x , weight matrices U, W and bias b. These t then goes on to discuss the evolution of language modeling weights of the network are then updated through a training and transfer learning through models such as BERT, El Mo, algorithm called Backpropagation Through Time(BPTT) [5].
Ul MF it and so on. We conclude our survey and suggest future BPTT is, in essence, the backpropagation algorithm with improvements in section V. some modifications. The network is propagated for each time step- an operation that is often referred to as unrolling the RNN. The parameters of the neural network remain the same throughout the unrolling operation of the RNN. Corresponding errors concerning the predicted output and the ground truth are then calculated for each time step. Gradients of the error with respect to all parameters are then calculated and accumulated using the backpropagation algorithm. It is only after the unrolling is complete that all the parameters of the RNN are updated by using this accumulated error gradient.
Vanilla RNN s were successful in a wide variety of tasks including speech recognition, translation and language modelling. Despite their initial success, vanilla RNN s were only able to model short term dependencies. They failed to model long term dependencies, primarily because the information was often ”forgotten” after the unit activations were multiplied several times by small numbers. Further, they suffered from Fig. 1: Developments in Transfer Learning and Language various issues while training such as the vanishing gradient Modeling problem (the error gradient being used for weight updation reducing to very low values) and the exploding gradient prob II. BACKGROUND lem. Thus, successfully training and applying vanilla RNN s A. Vanilla RNN s was a challenging task.
Machine learning models have been widely been used for an B. Long Short Term Memory array of supervised as well as unsupervised learning tasks such as regression, classification, clustering and recommendation The problem of ’long-term’ dependencies faced by earlier modelling. Markov models such as the Multi-layer Perceptron recurrent neural networks was solved by designing a special Network, vector machines and logistic regression, however, kind of RNN architecture called the LSTM(Long Short Term did not perform well in sequence modeling tasks such as Memory) [6]. They were designed to keep track of information text classification, language modeling and tasks based on time for the extended number of timesteps. LSTM s have an overall chain-based architecture similar to RNN s but the crucial o = σ(W .[h ,x ] + b ) (7) t o t−1 t o difference is the improvements in the internal node structure.
While a node in RNN consists of a single neural layer, there h = o ∗ tanh(C ) (8) t t t are four layers connected uniquely in LSTM s as shown in the figure. where f ,i ,o indicate outputs of the forget gate, input gate t t t and output gate respectively. W and b indicate the weights and bias. C indicates the previous cell state, C(cid:101) represents the t−1 t new candidate values and the current cell state is shown by C .
t The advantage of using LSTM is that they offer more control in a network than the conventional recurrent networks.
The system is more sophisticated and can retain information over longer timesteps. However, the added gates lead to more computation requirement and thus LSTM s tend to be slower.
C. Gated Recurrent Units Gated Recurrent Units [8] or GRU s introduced by Cho, et al.
in 2014 are a curtailed variation of LSTM s designed to reduce the computation issues of the latter. The forget and input gates in LSTM s are combined into a single ’update gate’. The cell state and hidden states are also merged together and computed using a single ’reset gate’. The operations now performed are as follows: z = σ(W .[h ,x ]) (9) t z t−1 t Fig. 3: Chain structure of LSTM s [7] r = σ(W .[h ,x ]) (10) t r t−1 t The key feature of LSTM s is the information carrier con- (cid:101)h = tanh(W .[r ∗ h ,x ]) (11) t c t t−1 t nection present at the top known as the ’cell state’. It proves to be useful to carry information along longer distances with h = (1 − z ) ∗ h + z ∗ (cid:101)h (12) only minor linear operations taking place at each node.The t t t−1 t t ability to add or delete certain information of the cell state at each node is provided by structures called as gates. LSTM has three such gates, each comprising of a sigmoid neural net layer and a pointwise multiplier.
The ’forget gate’ decides what information is to be retained in the cell state by using a sigmoid layer which outputs a value between 0 and 1(0 indicates ’forget everything’ while 1 indicates ’retain completely’). The ’input gate’ layer is used to determine new information which is to be added to the cell state. It involves deciding which values to be updated and the new candidates to do so. The previous cell state values and the new candidate values are then combined to get the final new cell state. The output to be forwarded by the node is decided by combining the values of current cell state with the results of the ’output layer’. The output is generally supporting information relevant to the previous word. Mathematically, the operations performed using the three gates can be expressed Fig. 4: Internal structure of GRU s [7] as: f = σ(W .[h ,x ] + b ) (3) t f t−1 t f GRU s have the advantage of being able to control the flow of information without having an explicit memory unit, unlike i = σ(W .[h ,x ] + b ) (4) t i t−1 t i LSTM s. It exposes the hidden content of the node without any control. The performance is almost on par with LSTM but with C(cid:101) = tanh(W .[h ,x ] + b ) (5) t c t−1 t C efficient computation. However, with large data LSTM s with C = f ∗ C + i ∗ C(cid:101) (6) higher expressiveness may lead to better results.
t t t−1 t t D. Average SGD Weight Dropped(AWD)-LSTM that it provides.
The Seq 2 Seq architecture [10] has been used to perform AWD-LSTM [9], despite its relatively simple 3-layer LSTM a wide variety of tasks including Neural Machine Translaarchitecture was proven to be highly effective for Language tion(NMT), Abstractive summarization and chatbot systems.
Modeling tasks. It employed a novel algorithm called Drop The traditional Seq 2 Seq architecture consists of an encoder Connect to mediate the problem of overfitting that had been RNN(LSTM/GRU) followed by a decoder RNN. The encoder inherent in the RNN architecture. Besides, the authors used encoded the given sequence into a fixed-length vector. The Non-monotonically Triggered ASGD(NTASGD) algorithm to decoder generated the output sequence after taking the fixedoptimize the network.
length vector as source hidden state. While giving significant Dropconnect Algorithm Neural networks, prone to overfitimprovements in the domains of neural machine translation, ting, traditionally utilised Dropout as regularization to prevent encoding the context of complex and long sequences into overfitting. Dropout, an algorithm that randomly(with a proba single vector impeded the performance of the network.
ability p) ignore units’ activations during the training phase This was since a fixed-length vector was often incapable allows for the regularization of a neural network. By diminishof effectively encoding the context of the given sequence.
ing the probability of neurons developing inter-dependencies, Consequently, this led to the birth of the Attention Mechanism, it increases the individual power of a neuron and thus reduces a novel technique that allowed the neural network to identify overfitting. However, dropout has not been able to provide which input tokens are relevant to a corresponding target token commensurate results in case of the RNN architectures. In in the output.
essence, it inhibits the RNN’s capability of developing long term dependencies as there is loss of information caused due F. Attention Mechanism to randomly ignoring units activations.
Instead of encoding a single vector to represent the se To this end, the drop connect algorithm randomly drops quence, the attention mechanism [11] computes a context weights instead of neuron activations. It does so by ranvector for all tokens in the input sequence for each token in domly(with probability 1-p) setting weights of the neural the output. The decoder computes a relevancy score for all network to zero during the training phase. Thus redressing tokens on the input side. These scores are then normalized the issue of information loss in the Recurrent Neural Network by performing a softmax operation to obtain the Attention while still performing regularization.
weights. These weights are then used to perform a weighted Non-monotonically Triggered ASGD (NT-ASGD) sum of the encoder’s hidden states, thus obtaining the Context Stochastic gradient descent has been demonstrated to offer Vector c .
good performance for language modeling tasks through saddle t point avoidance and linear convergence. Thus, the authors go exp(score(h ,h )) t s α = (13) on to investigate a variant of SGD- averaged SGD. Averaged ts (cid:80)S exp(score(h ,h ))) s(cid:48)=1 t s(cid:48) SGD-almost identical to vanilla SGD- differs in the fact that (cid:88) an averaging of the weights(which are cached) is performed c = α h (14) t ts s after a threshold number of iterations T is over.
s While theoretically able to control the effects of noise, a = f(c ,h ) = tanh(W [c ;h ]) (15) t t t c t t averaged SGD has found little use while training neural networks. This has been mainly attributed by the author to am- A hyperbolic tangent operation is performed on the concatebiguous guidelines regarding the tuning of hyperparameters: nation of the context vector and the target hidden state to get learning rate scheduler and averaging trigger. A commonly the Attention vector a . This attention vector generally prot used strategy while using the SGD optimizer is to reduce the vides a better representation of the sequence than traditional learning rate by a fixed quantity when the validation error fixed-sized vector methods.
worsens or fails to improve. Similarly, one may perform the By identifying the relevant input tokens while generating averaging operation after validation error worsens. The Non- the output token, Attention mechanism is able to redress monotonically triggered ASGD employs a similar technique. the problem of compressing the context of the text into a It differs in the fact that, instead of performing averaging fixed-sized vector. Using this mechanism Bahdanu et. al. [11] when the validation error worsens NT-ASGD performs the were able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in machine averaging operation if the validation error fails to improve. translation tasks.
NT-ASGD introduces two new hyperparameters-the logging III. THE TRANSFORMER ARCHITECTURE interval L and the non-monotone interval n. Consequently, the Owing to the significant improvements gained due to authors found that keeping n = 5 provided good performance the Attention mechanism, Vaswani et. al. [12] proposed the in general. Better results were achieved compared to SGD Transformer architecture. The Transformer achieved new while training their model.
state-of-the-art results in various tasks such as machine E. Seq 2 Seq Architecture translation, entailment and so on. As shown in Fig.5, We take the example of neural machine translation to ex- the Transformer consists of an encoder and a decoder.
plain the working of the Attention Mechanism and advantages Furthermore, the encoder consists of a Multi-Head Attention sequence that were relevant to the current token. Specifically, the authors made use of Scaled dot-Product Attention.
QKT Attention(Q,K,V ) = softmax( √ )V (19) d k As shown above, the Scaled dot-Product Attention takes three vectors as input- the key, value and query.As shown, we perform a weighted average of the value vector V . The weights are assigned by using a ”compatibility function” to find .
Embedding E is the output value of previous hidden layer • Query, Q = EW • q Key, Q = EW • k Value, Q = EW • v Where W , W and W are weight matrices. A dot product q k v of the query vector Q and key vector K is performed with √ a scaling factor 1/ dk. The scaling factor is used to avoid the softmax input falling in a range where the output falls to a negligible value. A softmax operation is performed on the output of softmax. The final vector is multiplied with the value Fig. 5: Architecture of the Transformer vector through a matrix multiplication operation to obtain the final attention scores.
layer, residual connections, normalization layer and a generic feed-forward Layer. The decoder is almost identical to the encoder but contains a certain ”Masked” Multi-Head Attention layer.
Encoder: The encoder takes as input the input embedding that is added with the positional encoding. The positional encoding allows for the retention of position and order related information. The authors employ the following equations to compute the positional encoding: PE = sin(pos/10000(2 i/d model )) (16) (pos,2 i) PE = cos(pos/10000(2 i/d model )) (17) (pos,2 i+1) Where pos is the position of the word in the sequence and Fig. 6: Multi-Headed and Scaled Dot-Product Attention i is the dimension. This positional encoding is added to the input embedding. It is then followed by a residual connection R, defined as follows: Multi-Headed Attention: Additionally, to reduce the number of operations to compute Attention scores, the authors make R(x) = Layer Norm(x + Multi Headed Attention(x)) use of Multi-Headed Attention. Multi-Head Attention splits the (18) vector space into ’n’ parts. These divisions are then passed to Where x is the value of the input embedding added with ’n’ Attention Heads to perform the Self-Attention operation, positional encoding. Thus we are effectively able to encode the results of these operations are then concatenated. In the semantic and position-related information using the input addition to reducing the number of operations, Multi-Headed and positional encodings. Attention allows the model to ”jointly attend to information Decoder: As previously stated, the decoder is almost identical from different representation subspaces at different positions”.
to the Encoder but for the ”Masked” Multi-Headed Attention Masked Multi-Headed Attention: The Masked Multi Layer. Headed Attention is similar to the Multi-Headed Attention Scaled dot-Product Attention: While generating embeddings but performs an additional ”masking” operations. The decoder for each word in the input token, the authors made use of is allowed to attend to only the previous positions while the self attention mechanism. Self attention, similar to vanilla computing self-attention passing the output embedding. This attention, allows the Transformer to identify words in the input would result in the transformer being able to attend to the subsequent positions and consequently the output prediction The authors found that choosing a value of learning in the sequence. To prevent this undesirable phenomenon, all rate for the last layers and then setting the learning rate subsequent positions are set to −∞ before computing the self- of lower layers by the relation ηl−1 = ηl/2.6 worked attention that is passed to higher layers. well.
Finally, a softmax layer is used as the to compute output word probabilities. The word probabilities are in the form of a vector Slanted Triangular Learning Rates: The Slanted that has a size equal to the size of the vocabulary of the training Triangular Learning Rate is defined by the author as set. follows: by using a high initial learning rate, the model Based on the Attention mechanism and without using any would quickly converge to an appropriate region in the recurrence mechanism, the Transformer effectively supplanted hyperspace. The learning rate is then linearly decayed the Recurrent Neural Network Architectures-LSTM, GRU, in order to improve the parameters on target task at a etc.-as the state-of-the-art in several NLP tasks. It is used fine rate. The authors defined three new equations: for a wide variety of tasks including machine translation and constituency parsing. cut = [T · cut ] frac IV. EVOLUTION OF TRANSFER LEARNING AND   t/cut, t < cut   LANGUAGE MODELING p = A. ULMFIT 1 − t − cut , otherwise cut·(1/cut − 1) frac Universal Language Model Fine-tuning (ULMF it) [13]- a method to fine-tune a pre-trained language model- was one 1 + p·(ratio − 1) η = η · t max ratio of the forerunners of inductive transfer learning in NLP. By definition, the language modeling task entails that given a where T is the number of iterations, cut the fracfrac sequence of tokens, the model has to predict the likelihood tion of iterations that the LR is increased and p is of the next token based on the sequence. The ULMF it method the number of iterations that the LR is going to be achieved good results by using the then state-of-the-art AWD decreased or has been decreased. Additionally, ratio LSTM for their experiments. The proposed network was a simdefines eta /eta and cut is the cutoff iteration min max ple 3-layer neural network without any attention mechanism, where the model switches from an increasing LR to a skip connections etc. ULMF it allowed for transfer learning by decreasing LR.
employing the following three steps in the stated order: 3) Fine-Tuning the Classifier on Target Task To perform 1) Generic Pretraining of the Language Model: The task-specific classification, two linear blocks initialized authors pre-trained their language model on Wiki Text- from scratch are added to the language model. The 103– a large general-purpose dataset that consists of author follows standard practices such as Batch Normal 28,595 preprocessed articles and 103 million words. This ization and Dropout to perform regularization. Besides, step allowed the language model to capture the general the Re Lu activation function is used similar to those properties of the given language. Also, while computa- used in Computer Vision models.
tionally expensive, this task need to be performed only Concat Pooling: To preserve information contained in once. few words, the input provided to this classifier is a 2) Fine-tuning the Language Model on the Target task: concatenation of the last hidden layers and the average This step allowed the language model to capture the and max pooled output of the previous hidden layers.
inherent nuances of the target task,thus allowing better For this purpose, the author sought to concatenate as performance. Furthermore, this step can be performed on many hidden layers as would fit in the GPU memory.
a relatively smaller dataset, thus requiring relatively less The concatenation h is as given below: c computational power. The authors then proposed two novel methods- Discriminative Fine-tuning and Slanted h = concatenate(h ,maxpool(H),averagepool(H)) c T Triangular Learning rates to perform this task. (21) Discriminative fine-tuning - Different layers of the where H = {h ,h ..h } 1 2 T model extract different features from the text. Thus, the use of different learning rates for different layers Gradual Unfreezing: Keeping all parameters trainable, seemed apt. To this end, the the authors formulated i.e. performing the updation of all parameters during Discriminative Fine-Tuning, a variation of the SGD training would lead to a rapid loss in information learnt optimizer-as follows: during the pre-training phase. To tackle this, the authors have gradually ”unfrozen” the layers. In essence, the θl = θl − ηl · ∇ J(θ) (20) t t−1 θl authors start by unfreezing the last layers and then Where, θ is the weight, t is the iteration, l is the layer, perform fine-tuning. They repeat this process until all ∇ J(θ) is the error gradient, η is the learning rate and layers of the AWD-LSTM have not been trained.
θl J indicates the error function. Bidirectional LM: The authors train both a forward LM as well as a backward LM. Consequently averaging of the bi LM are frozen. ELMO is then concatenated with k the predictions given by both the Language Models. it and the obtained representations are then forwarded to the One can apply transfer learning using ULMF it by using pre- task-specific architecture. A pretrained bi LM can be used to trained models trained on datasets such as the Wikitext 103 obtain representations for any tasks and with fine-tuning, they data. Fine-tuning is performed by adding training the network have shown a decrease in perplexity thereby benefiting from on the target task by using supervised learning transfer learning.
The addition of ELM o embeddings to existing models has B. Embeddings from Language Models(ELM o) helped them process more useful information from the sen Traditional word embeddings involve assigning a unique tences and thus enhanced the performances in many applicavector to each word. These word embeddings are fixed and tions like question answering, semantic role labelling, named independent of the context in which the words are being entity extraction and many more.
used. Peters et. al came up with a new word representation ELM o provides an enhancement to the traditional word called ”Embeddings from Language Models(ELM o)”, [14] embedding techniques by incorporating context while generin which the tokens beings assigned to each word were ating the same. The vector generated by ELM o can be used a function of the entire sentence of which the word as a for a general downstream task. This is sometimes done by part of. These embeddings are obtained from the internal passing the generated word embeddings to another neural layers of a deep bidirectional LSTM that is trained with a network(eg. LSTM) which is then trained on the target task.
coupled language model objective (bi LM) on a large text Furthermore, concatenation of ELM o embeddings with other corpus. These representations are more elaborate as they are word embeddings is also done to provide better performance.
dependent on all of the internal layers of the bi LM. The C. Open AI Transformer word representations are computed on top of two-layer bi LM s with character convolutions as a linear function of the internal Although there is availability of large text corpora, labelled network states. For a given set of tokens, the bi LM computes data is tough to find and manually labelling the data is an their probability by taking into consideration the logarithmic equally tedious task. Radford et al. at Open AI proposed a likelihood of both the previous words(forward LM) as well as semi-supervised approach called Generative Pre-training(GPT) the future words(backward LM) and maximizing it. [15] which involved unsupervised pre-tuning of the model and then task-specific supervised fine-tuning for language N (cid:88) →− understanding tasks. The Transformer is used as the base p(t ,t ,...,t ) = (logp(t |t ,...,t ;Θ , Θ ,Θ )+ 1 2 N k 1 k−1 x LSTM s model for this purpose. The unsupervised learning helps to k=1 ←− set the initial parameters of the model based on a language logp(t |t ,...,t ;Θ , Θ ,Θ )) k k+1 N x LSTM s modeling objective. The subsequent supervised learning helps (22) the parameters adjust to the target task.
where Θ and Θ indicate the parameters for the softmax s x Initially, a multi-layer transformer decoder is used to prolayer and the token representations in the forward and backduce an output distribution over the target tokens based on a ward layer respectively. The ELM o model uses the intermedimulti-headed self-attention mechanism.
ate layer representation of the bi LM. ELM o combines all the layers of the bi LM representation into a single vector ELMO h 0 = UW c + W p (24) k to be accommodated later in the fine-tuning task. Generally, for a given task of obtaining word embeddings in the language h = transformer block(h )∀i ∈ [1,n] (25) modeling phase, we find the obtained weightings of all bi LM l l−1 layers: L (cid:88) P(u) = softmax(h WT) (26) ELM otask = γtask staskh LM (23) n c k j k,j j=0 where h is the transformer layer’s activations, W is the i c where stask are the weights and γtask is a scalar quantity. token embedding matrix and W p is the position embedding stask is obtained after normalizing the weights and passing matrix. The supervised learning task then obtains the final them through a softmax layer. γtask, on the other hand, transformer block activations hl m which are passed through allows us to scale the ELM o vector. γtask plays an important a softmax layer to predict output label y: role in the optimization process. The layer representation →− ←− P(y|x 1,...,xm) = softmax(hm W ) (27) l y h LM = [ h LM; h LM] for each bi LSTM layer wiz. combinak,j k,j k,j tion of forward context representations and backward context to maximize representations. (cid:88) L (C) = log P(y|x 1,...,xn) (28) Such a deep representation helps ELM o to trace two im- 2 (x,y) portant factors (1) Complex characteristics like the syntax and semantics of the words being used and (2) Their variations where C indicates the labeled dataset with each sequence across linguistic contexts. For any supervised task, the weights consisting of tokens x 1,x 2,..xm. During transfer learning, the input is converted into a single contiguous sequence of tokens and a random choice of the second sentence for the negative so as to fit the pre-trained model. examples. The input sequence for this pair classification task Open AI transformer improvises on generative pre-training is generated as: to improve performance on tasks by providing a better start [CLS] < Sentence A > [SEP] < Sentence B > [SEP], than random initialization. A single model is able to produce where sentences A and B are two sentences after performing quality results with minimum task-specific customization or the masking operations. The [CLS] token is the first token used hyperparameter tuning, thereby showing its robustness. This to obtain a fixed vector representation that is consequently architecture model was able to outperform other approaches used for classification and [SEP] is used to separate the two on tasks like natural language inference, question answering, input sequence. The authors were able to achieve an impressive sentence similarity etc. accuracy of 97-98% in the next sentence prediction task.
Pre-Training Procedure The authors have used the D. Bidirectional Encoder Represenation from Transform Books Corpus and the English Wikipedia as pretraining data.
ers(BERT) They have used two variations of BERT- BERT (12 BASE BERT [16] -proposed by J.Devlin et al.- is a novel aplayer) and BERT (24 layers)- that primarily differ in LARGE proach to incorporate bidirectionality in a single Transformer their depth. The maximum length of the input sequence is model. A particularly challenging task, direct approaches to restricted to 512 tokens. All subsequent tokens in the sequence incorporating bidirectionality in Transformer models fail since are neglected. A dropout value of 0.1 is used as regularization.
direct bidirectional conditioning would allow the words to Furthermore, the authors have made use of the GELU instead see themselves in the light of context from multiple layers, of Relu as activation function. GELU- Gaussian Error Linear thereby ruling out the possibility of using it as a Language units has been shown to provide improvements compared to Model. In essence, it was traditionally only possible to train Re LU and e Lu.
a unidirectional encoder- a left-right or a right-left model.
Training of the models was performed on TPU s, specifically However, bidirectional models that could see the complete BERT was trained on 16 TPU chips for 4 days.
BASE sequence context would inherently be more powerful than BERT was trained on 64 TPU chips, also for 4 days.
LARGE unidirectional models or a concatenation of two unidirectional Fine-Tuning Procedure The pre-trained BERT can be finemodels-left-right and right-left. To this end, the authors trained tuned on a relatively small dataset and requires lesser protheir model on two unsupervised prediction tasks: cessing power. BERT was able to improve upon the previous Masked LM To overcome the challenges posed while apstate-of-the-art in several tasks involving natural language plying of bi-directionality in Transformers, J.Devlin proposed inference, question answering, semantic similarity, linguistic masking of random tokens in the sequence. The Transformer acceptability among other tasks. The pattern of the input and was trained such that it had to predict only the words that had output sequence varies depending on the type of the task. The been masked while being able to view the whole sequence.
tasks can be broadly divided into four categories: Word Piece Tokenization is used to generate the sequence of Single Sentence Classification Tasks: These tasks are per- • tokens where rare words are split into sub-tokens. Masking formed by adding layers on the classification embedding of 15% of the Wordpiece Tokens is performed. Masking [CLS] and passing the input sequence preceded by the essentially replace the words with [MASK] tokens. How- [CLS] token.
ever, instead of always replacing the selected words with a Sentence Pair Classification Tasks The two sentences are • [MASK] token, the data generator employs the following passed to BERT after being separated by the [SEP] approach: token. Classification can be performed by adding layers Replace the word with [MASK] token 80% of the time • to the [CLS Replace the word with another random word 10% of time • Question Answering Tasks • Keep the word as it is 10% of the time • Single Sentence Tagging Tasks • Performing prediction on only 15% of all words instead of Subsequently, two multilingual BERT models-uncased and performing prediction on all words would entail that BERT cased-for over 102 languages were released. Furthermore, would be much slower to converge. However, BERT showed Open AI released the GPT 2 [17], essentially BERT trained as immediate improvements in absolute accuracy while converga language model on a very large amount of data.
ing at a slightly slower pace than traditional unidirectional E. Universal sentence encoder left-right models.
Next Sentence Prediction This task entails predicting The amount of supervised training data present for language whether the first sequence provided immediately precedes the processing tasks is limited. The use of pre-trained word next. This task allows the Transformer to perform better on embeddings has proved to be useful in this case as they several downstream tasks such as question-answering, Natural perform a limited amount of transfer learning. Daniel et al.
Language Inference that involve understanding the relationship [18] proposed a new approach which involved direct encoding between two input sequences. The dataset so used for training of sentences instead of words into vectors. The sentence had a balanced 50/50 distribution created as follows: choosing encoded vectors are found to require minimal task-specific an actual pair of neighbouring sentences for positive examples data to produce good results. The encoder models are available in two architectures taking into consideration the two primal F. Transformer-XL challenges of training transfer learning models wiz. complexity The Transformer-XL [20]was able to model very long-range and accuracy.
dependencies. It did so by overcoming one limitation of the 1) Transformer based architecture: The first model makes vanilla Transformer- fixed-length context. Vanilla Transformuse of the transformer architecture to construct sentence em- ers were incapable of accommodating a very long sequence beddings. The encoding subgraph of the transformer architec- owing to this limitation. Hence they resorted to alternatives ture is used for this purpose. Attention mechanism is used such as splitting the corpus into segments which could be to find context-based word representations which are then managed by the Transformers. This led to loss of context converted into a fixed-length sentence encoding vector. The among individual segments despite being part of the same input to the transformer model is a lower case Penn Treebank corpus. However, the Transformer-XL was able to take the 3(PTB) [19] tokenized string and a 512-dimensional sentence entire large corpus as input, thus preserving this contextual embedding is produced as the output. A single encoding information. In essence a vanilla Transformer, it relied on model is trained over multiple tasks to make it as general two novel techniques-Recurrence mechanism and Positional as possible. This model achieves superior accuracy over the Encoding- to provide the improvement.
other architecture but at the expense of increased computation 1) Recurrence mechanism: Instead of training the Transrequirement and complexity. former on individual segments of the corpus(without regards to previous context), the authors propose caching the hidden 2) Deep Averaging Network(DAN) architecture: In this sequence state computed from the previous segments. Conmodel, the input embeddings for words and bi-grams are aversequently, the model computes self attention(and other operaaged and then passed through a deep neural network. The input tions) on the current hidden/input state as well as these cached and output format are same as that of the transformer encoder.
hidden states. The number of states cached during training Multitask learning, similar to the transformer model encoder is limited due to memory limitations of the GPU. However, model is used for training purpose. The main advantage of during inference, the authors can increase the number of this model is that it performs the required operations in linear cached hidden states used to model long-term dependency.
time.
2) Relative Positional Encoding: An inherent problem with The main difference between the transformer and DAN using the said Recurrence mechanism is preserving relative encoder models is of time complexity(O(n 2) and O(n) repositional information while reusing cached states. The authors spectively). The memory requirement for the transformer overcame this problem by incorporating Relative Positional model increases quickly with increase in sentence length while Encoding in the Attention mechanism(instead of hidden states) that of DAN model remains constant. The trade-off between of the Transformer. They do so by encoding information recomplexity and accuracy should be noted when deciding a garding the positional embedding dynamically in the Attention particular architecture for a given task.
scores themselves. The distance of the key vectors for the The unsupervised learning data used for training in both the query vector is the temporal information that is encoded in the cases included Wikipedia, web news and discussion forums.
Attention scores. In essence, computing attention is facilitated Augmentation is performed using training on supervised data as temporal distance is still available to the model while still from the Stanford Natural Language Inference(SNLI) corpus preserving previous states. Furthermore, information regarding which improved the performance further. The universal senthe absolute position can be recovered recursively.
tence encoder can be used for a variety of transfer tasks includ The Transformer-XL was able to surpass the state-of-the-art ing sentiment analysis, sentence classification, text similarity results for language modelling tasks on the enwiki 8 and text 8 etc. For determining a pairwise semantic similarity between datasets.
two sentences, the similarity of the sentence embeddings G. XLN et produced by the encoder can be calculated and converted into angular distance to get the final result. The BERT model proposed by Authors et. al, was an Auto Encoding(AE) model that suffered from the following u.v problems: sim(u,v) = (1 − arccos( )/π) (29) ||u||||v|| The use of [MASK] tokens during the pre-training phase • led to a discrepancy as these tokens were absent during The sentence embeddings outperform the results of word the fine-tuning phase.
embeddings on the fore mentioned tasks. However, combining The model neglected inherent dependencies among two • word and sentence embeddings for transfer learning produced or more [MASK] tokens, thus leading to sub-optimal the best overall results. Universal sentence encoder assists the performance.
most when limited training data is available for the transfer A new model, the XLN et [21] was able to overcome these task.
difficulties by using a modification of general autoregressive The Universal Sentence Encoder can be used for down- pretraining.
stream tasks bypassing the generated embedding to a classifier Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining Phase Instead such as an SVM or another deep neural network. of using unidirectional language modeling or bidirectional masked language model to predict tokens, the paper proposed by Watching Movies and Reading Books”, ar Xiv:1506.06724 passing all permutations of a given sequence to the model [cs.CV] and predicting a particular token missing from this sequence.
[2] Ciprian Chelba, Tomas Mikolov, Mike Schuster, Qi Ge, Thorsten Despite random re-ordering of the sequence, order-related Brants, Phillipp Koehn, Tony Robinson, ”One Billion Word information remains preserved as positional encodings of the Benchmark for Measuring Progress in Statistical Language tokens remained the same for all permutations of the input Modeling”, ar Xiv:1312.3005 [cs.CL] sequence.
[3] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, Use of this modified form of pretraining helped overcome Li Fei-Fei, ”Image Net: A large-scale hierarchical image the two main challenges posed by the BERT architecture.
database”, 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Along with that, the XLN et incorporated Transformer-XL into Pattern Recognition its core architecture. This allowed for better modeling of longdependencies compared to BERT. Through the use of these [4] Zachary C. Lipton, John Berkowitz, Charles Elkan, ”A Critical Review of Recurrent Neural Networks for Sequence Learning”, two major modifications, the XLN et provided new state-ofar Xiv:1506.00019 [cs.LG] the-art results in 18 natural language processing tasks.
Significant gains were observed compared to BERT espe- [5] P.J. Werbos, ”Backpropagation through time: what it does and cially in tasks such as machine reading comprehension which how to do it”, Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume: 78 , Issue: 10 required modeling of long-range dependencies. The authors , Oct 1990 attribute this improvement mainly to the use of Transformer- [6] Sepp Hochreiter,Jurgen Schmidhuber, ”Long short-term XL in the XLN et architecture. The XLN et, similar to BERT, memory”, Neural Computation 9(8):1735-1780, 1997 can be used for a wide range of single sentence, sentence pair and reading comprehension tasks among others. [7] Christopher Olah, ”Understanding LSTM Networks”, https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTM s/ V. CONCLUSION [8] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, D. Bahdanau, Y. Bengio, ”On We have thus provided a lucid summary of recent advances the properties of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder in the domain of transfer learning in the domain of natural approaches”, ar Xiv preprint ar Xiv:1409.1259, 2014 language processing. We hope that this survey would help [9] Stephen Merity, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Richard Socher, the reader gain a quick and profound understanding of this ”Regularizing and Optimizing LSTM Language Models”, domain. Recent advances in this domain, despite being a ar Xiv:1708.02182 [cs.CL] step forward, come with their challenges. Specifically, large architectures such as the BERT, XLN et and Transformer-XL [10] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, Quoc V. Le, ”Sequence to make training and deployment difficult owing to the large Sequence Learning with Neural Networks”, ar Xiv:1409.3215 [cs.CL] amount of processing power required. Furthermore, employing large and opaque models impedes upon the explainability [11] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, Yoshua Bengio, ”Neural aspect of the same, thus making one question their deploy Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”, ment in the real-world. Thirdly, while newer models can ar Xiv:1409.0473 [cs.CL] provide improvements over their predecessors, the lack of [12] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, a standard benchmark dataset for pre-training these models Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin, makes one question whether these improvements were due ”Attention is All you Need”, Advances in Neural Information to an architectural innovation or simply because the said Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017) model was pre-trained on larger amount of data. Take for instance, it is difficult to gauge whether the XLN et model [13] Jeremy Howard, Sebastian Ruder, ”Universal Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classification”, ar Xiv:1801.06146 [cs.CL] bettered upon the BERT model because of an architectural improvement or because it was pre-trained on a larger corpus.
[14] Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Thus, there is a need to decide upon a standard pre-training Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Luke Zettlemoyer, ”Deep dataset to remove this ambiguity. Lighter models such as the Contextualized Word Representations”, Volume: Proceedings Distil BERT and ALBERT are a step in the right direction and of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language could potentially help bridge the gap between performance Technologies, Volume 1, June 2018 and processing power. On the other hand, innovations brought about during the training phase, such as in the Ro BERT a model [15] Alec Radford, Kartik Narsimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever might help seek out better performance using the same model ”Improving Language Understanding by Generative Prearchitecture. Training”,2018 REFERENCES [16] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, ”BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional [1] Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Transformers for Language Understanding”, ar Xiv:1810.04805 Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, Sanja Fidler, ”Aligning [cs.CL] Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explanations [17] Radford, Alec and Wu, Jeff and Child, Rewon and Luan, David and Amodei, Dario and Sutskever, Ilya, ”Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners”, 2019 [18] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St. John, Noah Constant, Mario Guajardo Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, Ray Kurzweil, ”Universal Sentence Encoder”, ar Xiv:1803.11175 [cs.CL] [19] Marcus, Mitchell P. and Marcinkiewicz, Mary Ann and Santorini, Beatrice, ”Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank”, Computational Linguistics Volume 19 Issue 2, 0891-2017, June 1993.
[20] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, ”Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context”, ar Xiv:1901.02860 [cs.LG] [21] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Quoc V. Le, ”XLN et: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding”, ar Xiv:1906.08237 [cs.CL]