IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 1 Hitchhiker’s Guide to Super-Resolution: Introduction and Recent Advances Brian B. Moser 1,2, Federico Raue 1, Stanislav Frolov 1, Sebastian Palacio 1, Jo¨rn Hees 1, Andreas Dengel 1,2 1 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany 2 TU Kaiserslautern, Germany first.second@dfki.de Abstract—With the advent of Deep Learning (DL), Super-Resolution (SR) has also become a thriving research area. However, despite promising results, the field still faces challenges that require further research, e.g., allowing flexible upsampling, more effective loss functions, and better evaluation metrics. We review the domain of SR in light of recent advances and examine state-of-the-art models such as diffusion (DDPM) and transformer-based SR models. We critically discuss contemporary strategies used in SR and identify promising yet unexplored research directions. We complement previous surveys by incorporating the latest developments in the field, such as uncertainty-driven losses, wavelet networks, neural architecture search, novel normalization methods, and the latest evaluation techniques. We also include several visualizations for the models and methods throughout each chapter to facilitate a global understanding of the trends in the field. This review ultimately aims at helping researchers to push the boundaries of DL applied to SR.
Index Terms—Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence, Super-Resolution, Deep Learning, Survey, IEEE, TPAMI.
(cid:70) 1 INTRODUCTION SUPER-RESOLUTION (SR) is the process of enhancing ing objectives (pixel, uncertainty-driven, and content loss) Low-Resolution (LR) images to High-Resolution (HR). as well as more sophisticated objectives like adversarial The applications range from natural images [1], [2] to highly loss and denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Section 4 advanced satellite [3], and medical imaging [4]. Despite its covers interpolation- and learning-based upsampling. Seclong history [5], SR remains a challenging task in computer tion 5 goes over the basic mechanisms of attention used vision because it is notoriously ill-posed: several HR images in SR. Section 6 explains additional learning strategies, can be valid for any given LR image due to many aspects covering a variety of techniques that can be applied for perlike brightness and coloring [6], [7]. The fundamental un- formance improvement. It discusses curriculum learning, certainties in the relation between LR and HR images pose enhanced predictions, network fusion, multi-task learning, a complex research task. Thanks to rapid advances in Deep and normalization. Section 7 introduces SR models. It goes Learning (DL), SR has made significant progress in recent through different architecture types, such as simple, residyears. Unfortunately, entry into this field is overwhelming ual, recurrent-based, lightweight, and wavelet transformbecause of the abundance of publications. It is knotty work based networks. Several graphical visualizations (also in to get an overview of the advantages and disadvantages supplementary material) accompany the chapter, highlightbetween publications. This work unwinds some of the most ing the difference between the proposed architectures. Secrepresentative advances in the crowded field of SR. tion 8 and Section 9 introduce unsupervised SR and neural Existing surveys have primarily focused on classical architecture search combined with SR. Finally, this work methods [8], [9], whereas we, in contrast, concentrate exclu- summarizes and points to future directions in Section 10 sively on DL methods given their proven superiority. The and Section 11.
most similar survey to this work is the one by Bashir et al.
[4], which itself is a logical continuation of Wang et al. [5].
2 SETTING AND TERMINOLOGY However, our work focuses on methods that have recently gained popularity: uncertainty-driven loss, advances in im- This section focuses on four questions: (1) What is SR? (2) age quality assessment methods, new datasets, denoising How good is a stated SR solution? (3) What SR datasets diffusion probabilistic models, advances in normalization are available to test the solution? (4) How are images repretechniques, and new architecture approaches. This work sented in SR?
also reviews pioneering work that combines neural archi- The first question introduces the fundamental definitions tecture search with SR, which automatically derives designs as well as the terminology that is specific to SR. The second instead of relying solely on human dexterity [10]. Finally, relates to evaluation metrics that assess any proposed SR this work aims to give a broader overview of the field and solution, such as Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and highlight challenges as well as future trends. Structural Similarity Index (SSIM). The third question is Section 2 lays out definitions and introduces known linked to numerous datasets that provide various data metrics used by most SR publications. This section also types, such as 8 K resolution images or video sequences. Last introduces datasets and data types found in SR research. but not least, the fourth question addresses different image Section 3 presents commonly used regression-based learn- representations (i.e., color spaces) that SR models can use.
3202 be F 41 ]VC.sc[ 2 v 13131.9022:vi Xra IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 2 2.1 Problem Definition: Super-Resolution 2.2 Evaluation: Image Quality Assessment (IQA) Super-Resolution (SR) refers to methods that can develop Many properties are associated with excellent image quality, High-Resolution (HR) images from at least one Low- such as sharpness, contrast, or the absence of noise. Thus, Resolution (LR) image [5]. The SR field divides into Sin- fair evaluation of SR models is challenging. This section gle Image Super-Resolution (SISR) and Multi-Image Super- shows different evaluation methods that fall under the Resolution (MISR). In SISR, one LR image leads to one umbrella term Image Quality Assessment (IQA). Broadly HR image, whereas MISR generates many HR images from speaking, IQA refers to any metric based on perceptual many LR images. Regarding popularity, most researchers assessments of human viewers, i.e., how realistic the image focus on SISR because its techniques are extendable to MISR. appears after applying SR methods. IQA can be subjective (e.g., human raters) or objective (e.g., formal metrics).
2.1.1 Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) 2.2.1 Mean Opinion Score (MOS) The goal of Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is to scale up a given Low-Resolution (LR) image x ∈ Rw¯×h¯×c to a Digital images are ultimately meant to be viewed by human High-Resolution (HR) image y ∈ Rw×h×c , with w¯ ≤ w and beings. Thus, the most appropriate way of assessing images ¯ h ≤ h. Throughout this work, N = w · h · c defines the is a subjective evaluation [12], [13]. One commonly used x amount of pixels of an image x ∈ Rw×h×c and Ω the set of subjective IQA method is the Mean Opinion Score (MOS).
x all valid positions in x: Human viewers rate images with quality scores, typically 1 (bad) to 5 (good). MOS is the arithmetic mean of all ratΩ = {(i,j,k) ∈ N 3|i ≤ h,j ≤ w,k ≤ c} (1) x 1 ings. Despite reliability, mobilizing human resources is time Let s ∈ N be a scaling factor, it holds that h = s · h ¯ and consuming and cumbersome, especially for large datasets.
1 w = s · w¯. Furthermore, let D : Rw×h×c → Rw¯×h¯×c be a 2.2.2 Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) degradation mapping that describes the inherent relation Objectively assessing quality is of indisputable importance ship between the two entities LR (x) and HR (y): due to the massive amount of images produced in recent x = D(y;δ), (2) years and the weaknesses of subjective measurements. One in which δ are parameters of D that contain, for example, popular objective quality measurement is Peak Signal-tothe scaling factor s and other elements like blur type. Noise Ratio (PSNR). It is the ratio between the maximum possible pixel-value L (255 for 8-bit representations) and In practice, the degradation mapping is often unknown the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of reference images. Given and therefore modeled, e.g., with bicubic downsampling.
the approximation yˆ and the ground-truth y, PSNR is a The underlying challenge of SISR is to perform the inverse mapping of D. Unfortunately, this problem is ill-posed logarithmic quantity using the decibel scale [d B]: because one LR image can lead to multiple nonidentical HR L 2 images. The goal is to find a SR model M : Rw¯×h¯×c → PSNR(y,yˆ) = 10 · log 10 1 (cid:80) [y − yˆ ] 2 (5) Rw×h×c , s.t.: N y p∈Ω y p p yˆ = M(x;θ), (3) Although it is widely used as an evaluation criterion for SR models, it often leads to mediocre results in real where yˆ is the predicted HR approximation of the LR image scenarios. It focuses on pixel-level differences instead of x and θ the parameters of M.
mammalian visual perception, which is more attracted to For Deep Learning (DL), this translates into an optistructures [14]. Subsequently, it correlates poorly with submization objective that minimizes the difference between jectively perceived quality. Slight changes in pixels (e.g., the estimation yˆ and the ground-truth HR image y under shifting) can lead to a significantly decreased PSNR, while a given loss function L: humans barely recognize the difference. Consequently, new ˆ θ = argmin L(yˆ,y) (4) metrics focus on more structural features within an image.
θ 2.2.3 Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) The setting is illustrated in the supplementary material.
The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) depends on three 2.1.2 Multi-Image Super-Resolution (MISR) relatively independent entities: luminance, contrast, and Multi-Image Super-Resolution (MISR) is the task of yielding structures [14]. It is widely known and better meets the one or more HR images from many LR images [11]. An requirements of perceptual assessment [5]. SSIM estimates example is satellite imagery [3], where many LR examples for an image y the luminance µ as the mean of the intensity, y direct to a single HR prediction, a so-called many-to-one while it is estimating contrast σ as its standard deviation: y approach. An alternative is the many-to-many approach, 1 (cid:88) µ = y , (6) where many LR images lead to more than one HR image. It y p N y is usually employed for video sequence enhancing [11]. The p∈Ω y LR images are generally of the same scene, e.g., multiple 1 (cid:88) 2 σ = [y − µ ] (7) satellite images of the same geographical location. Given a y N − 1 p y y sequence x = (x ,...,x ) with T ∈ N and x ∈ Rw¯×h¯×c , p∈Ω y 1 T 1 t 0 < t ≤ T, the task is to predict y = (y ,...,y ) with In order to compare the entities, the authors of SSIM intro 1 T(cid:48) T(cid:48) ∈ N and y ∈ Rw×h×c , 0 < t(cid:48) ≤ T(cid:48) . The most frequent duced a similarity comparison function S: 1 t(cid:48) case is T = T(cid:48) , where y is supposed to be the HR image of 2 · x · y + c t x . Generally, MISR is an extension of the SISR setting. S (x,y,c) = , (8) t x 2 + y 2 + c IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 3 where x and y are the compared scalar variables, and 2.2.5 Task-based Evaluation (TBE) 2 c = (k · L) , 0 < k (cid:28) 1 is a constant to avoid instability. Alternatively, one can focus on task-oriented features. For Given a ground-truth image y and its approximation yˆ, the instance, one can measure quality differences from DL modcomparisons on luminance (C l ) and contrast (C c ) are els that solve other Computer Vision (CV) tasks like image classification. Other CV tasks can also benefit from includ C (y,yˆ) = S (µ ,µ ,c ) and C (y,yˆ) = S (σ ,σ ,c ) l y yˆ 1 c y yˆ 2 ing SR as a pre-processing step. Measuring the performance (9) on tasks, with and without SR, is yet another ingenious way where c ,c > 0. The empirical co-variance 1 2 to measure the quality of an SR method. HR images provide 1 (cid:88) more details, which are highly desirable for CV tasks like σ = (y − µ ) · (yˆ − µ ), (10) y,yˆ p y p yˆ N − 1 object recognition [3]. Nevertheless, it requires extra training y p∈Ω y steps, which can be avoided by using predefined features determines the structure comparison (C s ), expressed as the like those presented in the following section.
correlation coefficient between y and yˆ: σ + c 2.2.6 Evaluation with defined Features y,yˆ 3 C (y,yˆ) = , (11) s σ · σ + c One example is the Gradient Magnitude Similarity Dey yˆ 3 viation (GMSD) [26], which uses the pixel-wise Gradient where c > 0. Finally, the SSIM is defined as: 3 Magnitude Similarity (GMS). Based on the variation of SSIM(y,yˆ) = [C (y,yˆ)] α · [C (y,yˆ)] β · [C (y,yˆ)] γ (12) local quality, which arises from the diversity of local image l c s structures, GMS calculates the gradient magnitudes with: where α > 0,β > 0 and γ > 0 are adjustable control param- (cid:113) 2 2 eters for weighting relative importance of all components. m (p) = (∇ x) + (∇ x) ,p ∈ Ω (14) x h p v p x 2.2.4 Learning-based Perceptual Quality (LPQ) where ∇ h x and ∇ v x are the horizontal and vertical gradient images of x, respectively. The GMS map, similar to Lately, researchers have tried to mitigate some weak points Equation 9, is given by of MOS by using DL, the so-called Learning-based Perceptual Quality (LPQ). In essence, LPQ tries to approximate a GMS(y,yˆ) = S (m (p),m (p),c) (15) p y yˆ variety of subjective ratings by applying DL methods. One way is to use datasets that contain subjective scores, such as where c is a positive constant. The final IQA score is given TID 2013 [15], and a neural network to predict human rating by the average of the GMS map: scores, e.g., Deep QA [16] or NIMA [17]. 1 (cid:88) A significant drawback of LPQ is the limited availabil- GMSD(y,yˆ) = GMS(y,yˆ) (16) N p y ity of annotated samples. One can augment a small-sized p∈Ω y dataset by applying noise and ranking. Adding minimal An alternative is the Feature Similarity (FSIM) Index.
noise to an image should lead to poorer quality, making the It also uses gradient magnitudes, but combines them with noisy image and the original counterpart pairwise discrim Phase Congruency (PC), a local structure measurement, as inable. These pairs are called Quality-Discriminable Image feature points [27]. The phase congruency model postulates Pairs (DIP) [18]. The DIP Inferred Quality (dip IQ) index uses a biologically plausible model of how human visual systems Rank Net [19], which is based on a pairwise learning-to-rank detect and identify image features. These features are peralgorithm [20]. The authors of dip IQ show higher accuracy ceived where the Fourier components are maximal in phase.
and robustness in variation-rich content than by training di An extension to FSIM is the Haar wavelet-based Perceptual rectly on IQA databases like TID 2013 [15]. Another example Similarity Index (Haar PSI), which uses a Haar wavelet deis Rank IQA [21], in which a Siamese Network [22] is used composition to assess local similarities [28]. Its authors claim to rank image quality by using artificial distortions.
that it outperforms state-of-the-art IQA methods like SSIM Another inventive way to calculate the similarity beand FSIM in terms of execution time and higher correlations tween two images is to use DL to extract and compare feawith human opinion scores. They suggest that a multi-scale tures. One well-known representative is Learned Perceptual complex-valued wavelet filterbank directly influences the Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [23], which uses L feature computation of FSIM in the computation of the Fourier maps generated by an extractor ϕ, e.g., VGG [24]. Let H , W l l components. The approach is similar to FSIM but relies on be the height and width of the l-th feature map, respectively, 2 D discrete Haar wavelet transform.
and α ∈ RC l a scaling vector, then LPIPS is formulated as l (cid:13) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:13)2 2.2.7 Multi-Scale Evaluation L (cid:80) (cid:13)α (cid:12) ϕl (yˆ) − ϕl (y) (cid:13) (cid:88) h,w (cid:13) l h,w h,w (cid:13) LPIPS(y,yˆ) = 2 In practice, SR models usually super-resolve to different H W l l scaling factors, known as Multi-Scaling (MS). Thus, evaluatl=1 (13) ing metrics should address this scenario. The MS-Structural The authors showed that LPIPS aligns better with human Similarity (MS-SSIM) index [29] is a direct extension of judgments than PSNR or SSIM. However, the quality de- SSIM that incorporates MS. Compared to SSIM, it can be pends on the feature extractor underneath. more robust to variations in viewing conditions. It adds Another example is Deep Image Structure and Texture parameters that weight the relative importance of different Similarity (DISTS) [25], which combines spatial averages scales. MS-SSIM applies a low-pass filter and downsamples (texture) with the correlations of feature maps (structure). the filtered image by a factor of 2 for every scale level IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 4 tried to combine the advantages of other color spaces. The first DL-based SR model [39] used the first channel of the YC b Cr space. It is standard to capture only the Y channel if YC b Cr is employed [40] since focusing on structure instead of color is preferred. Recent SR models use the RGB color space, also because using something other than RGB color spaces is ill-defined when comparing state-of-the-art results if PSNR is used as evaluation metric [41], [42]. Exploring other color spaces for DL-based SR methods is nearly nonexistent, which presents an exciting research gap.
3 LEARNING OBJECTIVES The ultimate goal of SR is to provide a model that maps an LR image to an HR image. Therefore, the question naturally Fig.1. Exampleimagesfromdifferent SR datasets:Set 5[31],Set 14[1], arises: how to train a given SR model? The answer to this Manga 109 [32], General 100 [33], BSDS 100 [2], and BSDS 200 [2]. The question is given in the following sections.
ratio of the size differences is preserved.
3.1 Regression-based Objectives Regression-based objectives attempt to model the relation 1 ≤ i ≤ s , where s is the largest scale. By doing so, max max between input and the desired output explicitly. The paramit calculates the contrast and structure comparisons at each eters of the SR model are estimated directly from the data, scale and the luminance comparison for the largest scale often by minimizing the L 1 and L 2 losses. While both loss s . MS-SSIM is formulated as max functions are easily applicable, the results tend to be blurry.
s (cid:89) max We also discuss one way to mitigate this shortcoming, α β γ MS-SSIM(y,yˆ) = C (y,yˆ) · C (y,yˆ) i·C (y,yˆ) i , l c,i s,i namely by modeling uncertainty into the loss function itself.
i=1 (17) 3.1.1 Pixel Loss where α>0, β >0 and γ >0 are adjustable control paramei i The pixel loss measures the pixel-wise difference, as illusters. Similarly, the GMSD can be extended with trated in the supplementary material. There are two well- (cid:118) (cid:117)s known pixel loss functions in literature. The first one is the max MS-GMSD(y,yˆ) = (cid:117) (cid:116) (cid:88) α · (GMSD (y,yˆ)) 2 , (18) Mean Absolute Error (MAE), or L 1-loss: i i i=0 1 (cid:88) L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | (19) L 1 p p N where α are adjustable control parameters and GMSD is y i i p∈Ω y the GMSD score at i scale [30].
th It takes the absolute differences between every pixel of both images and returns the mean value. The second well-known 2.3 Datasets and Challenges pixel loss function is the Mean Squared Error (MSE), or L 2 loss. It weights high-value differences higher than low-value For SR, more extensive datasets have been made available differences due to an additional square operation: over the past years. Various accessible datasets contain vast amounts of images of different qualities and content, as 1 (cid:88) 2 L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | (20) L 2 p p shown in Figure 1. Some are created explicitly for SR in a N y p∈Ω y supervised manner with LR-HR pairs. Moreover, one can However, it is more common to see the L 1-loss in literature exploit datasets that do not come with SR annotations by because L 2 is very reactive to extraordinary values: too generating LR pairs and treating original samples as the smooth for low values and too variable for high values HR version. LR samples are typically computed using bicu- [38], [43]. There are variants in the literature, depending bic interpolation, and anti-aliasing [34]. The supplementary on the task and other specifications. A popular one is the material list commonly used datasets. Some of them were Charbonnier-loss [44], which is defined by published as part of a SR challenge. Two of the most famous challenges are the New Trends in Image Restoration and 1 (cid:88) (cid:113) 2 L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | + (cid:15)2, (21) Charbonnier p p Enhancement (NTIRE) challenge [35], and the Perceptual N y p∈Ω Image Restoration and Manipulation (PIRM) challenge [36]. y where 0 < (cid:15) (cid:28) 1 is a small constant such that the inner term is non-zero. Equation 19 can be seen as a special case 2.4 Color Spaces of Charbonnier with (cid:15) = 0.
Applications of SR can expand into other domains with Pixel loss functions favor a high PSNR because both additional modalities such as depth- or hyper-spectral SR. formulations use pixel differences. Also, PSNR does not However relevant, we restrict the scope of this review to correlate well with subjectively perceived quality (see Secthe more prevalent use case of color images (i.e., c=3). Data tion 2.2.2), which makes pixel loss functions sub-optimal.
representation (i.e., color space) has played a crucial role in Another observation is that the resultant images tend to be SR methods before DL. Nowadays, most researchers use the blurry: sharp edges need to be modeled better. One way to RGB color space [37], [38]. Nonetheless, researchers have combat this is by adding uncertainty.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 5 3.1.2 Uncertainty-Driven Loss to generate pixel-perfect estimations. Instead, it produces images whose features are close to the features of the target.
Modeling uncertainty in DL improves the performance and More formally, let ϕ be a Convolutional Neural Network robustness of deep networks [45]. Therefore, Ning et al.
(CNN) that extracts features like VGG [24] and let ϕl be the proposed an adaptive weighted loss for SISR [46], which l-th feature map. The content loss describes the difference of aims at prioritizing texture and edge pixels that are visually feature maps generated from the HR image ϕl (y) and the more significant than pixels in smooth regions. Thus, the approximation of it, ϕl (yˆ), and is defined as adaptive weighted loss treats every pixel unequally.
Inspired by insights from Variational Autoencoders (cid:13) (cid:13) L (y,yˆ,l) = (cid:13)ϕl (yˆ) − ϕl (y)(cid:13) (25) (VAE) [47], they first model an estimated uncertainty. Let Content (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 M be the SR model with parameters θ, which learns two The supplementary material provides a visualization intermediate results: µ (x), the mean image, and σ (x), θ θ of this approach. The motivation is to incorporate image the variance image (uncertainty). Consequently, the approxfeatures (content) instead of pixel-level details; a strategy imated image yˆ is given by that has been frequently used for Generative Adversarial yˆ = M(x;θ) = µ (x)+(cid:15) · σ (x), (22) Networks (GAN s), e.g., SRGAN [13].
θ θ (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) =yˆ =yˆ µ σ 3.2 Generative Adversarial Networks where (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I). Most DL-based SISR methods estimate only the mean yˆ . In contrast, Ning et al. proposed estimat- Since the early days of GAN s [50], they have had a variety of µ ing the uncertainty yˆ simultaneously [46]. applications in CV tasks e.g., in text-to-image synthesis [51].
σ The core idea is to use two distinct networks: a generator Based on the observation that the uncertainty is sparse G and a discriminator D. The generator network learns to for SISR due to many smooth areas, Ning et al. present an produce samples close to a given dataset and to fool the Estimating Sparse Uncertainty (ESU) loss: discriminator.
L ESU (y,yˆ) = exp(−lnyˆ σ ) · (cid:107)y − yˆ(cid:107) 1 + 2 · lnyˆ σ (23) In the case of SR, the generator is the SR model (G = M).
The discriminator tries to distinguish between samples However, they observed that L lowers the perfor ESU coming from the generator and samples from the actual mance and assumed that L is unsuitable for SISR. They ESU dataset. The interaction between the generator and discrimalso concluded that prioritizing pixels with high uncertainty inator corresponds to a minimax two-player game and is is necessary to benefit from uncertainty estimation.
optimized using the adversarial loss [12], [13]. Given the As a result, they proposed an adaptive weighted loss ground-truth HR image y of the LR image x and the named Uncertainty-Driven Loss (UDL) and used a monoapproximated SR image yˆ = G (x), the loss functions tonically increasing function instead of exp(−lnyˆ σ ) in θ G based on Cross-Entropy (CE) are: Equation 23: L UDL (y,yˆ) = [lnyˆ σ − min(lnyˆ σ )] · (cid:107)y − yˆ µ (cid:107) 1 , (24) LC G E = −E x∼P LR (x) log D θ D [G θ G (x)] (26) where [lnyˆ σ − min(lnyˆ σ )] is a non-negative linear scaling LC D E = − E y∼P HR (y) [log D θ D (y)] (27) function. There are two variables that need to be learned: − E [log(1 − D [G (x)])] x∼P (x) θ θ LR D G yˆ and yˆ . Ning et al. propose to use L to learn µ σ ESU An alternative is to use the Least Square (LS) [52], [53], yˆ and then to train a new network with L to learn σ UDL which yields better quality and training stability: yˆ , but with the pre-trained yˆ fixed [46]. The idea of µ σ u fr s o i m ng d t e w g o en t e ra ra in tin p g ro i c n e t s o se z s er i o s s t . o W p it r h ev t e h n is t s th et e u v p a , r t i h a e n y ce ac im hi a ev g e e LL G S = E x∼P LR (x) (D θ D [G θ G (x)] − 1) 2 (28) better results than L 1 and L 2 for a wide range of network LLS =E (D [G (x)]) 2 architectures [48], [49]. D x∼P LR (x) θ D θ G (29) + E (D (y) − 1) 2 However, it requires a two-step training procedure, y∼P HR (y) θ D which adds extra training time. To this day, we have yet Famously known for the GAN research field, but less to find any techniques that circumvent such a two-step explored for SR [54], is the Wasserstein loss with Gradient training process. The supplementary material contains ad- Penalty (WGAN-GP) [55], which is the extended version ditional visualizations. of the Wasserstein loss (WGAN). Despite variations, Lucic et al. have shown that most adversarial losses can reach 3.1.3 Content Loss comparable scores with enough hyper-parameter tuning Instead of using the difference between the approximated and random restarts [56]. However, this statement remains and the ground-truth image, one can transform both entities unproven for SR and requires more rigorous confirmation further into a more discriminant domain. Thus, the resul- in the future.
tant loss function utilizes feature maps from an external A recent review by Singla et al. [57] examines GAN s for feature extractor. Such an approach is similar to TBE (see SR in more detail. Generally, SR models perform better if an Section 2.2.5). In more detail, the feature extractor is pre- adversarial loss is incorporated. The primary disadvantage trained on another task, i.e., image classification or segmen- is that sufficient training stability is hard to reach due to tation. During the training of the actual SR model on the GAN-specific issues like mode collapse [13]. One way to difference of feature maps, the parameters of the feature improve the training stability is to introduce regularization extractor remain fixed. Thus, the goal of the SR model is not terms.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 6 3.2.1 Total Variation Loss One way to regularize GAN s is to use a Total Variation (TV) denoising technique known from image processing. First introduced by Rudin et al. [58], it filters noise by reducing the TV of a given signal. The TV loss [59] measures the difference of neighboring pixels in the vertical and horizontal direction in one image. It is defined as (cid:118) Fig. 2. Principle of DDPM s. The Gaussian diffusion process adds noise TV(y) = 1 (cid:88) (cid:117) (cid:117)(y − y ) 2 +(y − y ) 2 iteratively.Theiterativerefinementprocessrevertstheprocess.Thetask i+1,j,k i,j,k i,j+1,k i,j,k N (cid:116) of the SR model is to predict the noise added between two iterations.
y (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) i,j,k The predicted noise is then used to revert one iteration.
diff.firstaxis diff.secondaxis (30) and minimizing it results in images with smooth instead of sharp edges. This term helps to stabilize the training of Given γ and y, one can derive y from (cid:15) and vice versa by (cid:101) 0 GAN s [13], [52]. However, it can hurt the overall image rearranging Equation 34. Thus, a denoising model ϕ with θ quality since sharp edges are essential. parameters θ has to either predict y or (cid:15).
0 SR 3 applies the denoising model to predict the noise (cid:15).
3.2.2 Texture Loss The model ϕ θ (x,y (cid:101) ,γ) takes as input the LR image x, the variance of the noise γ, and the noisy target image y and is (cid:101) Texture synthesis with parametric texture models has a long optimized by the following loss function history with the goal of transferring global texture onto (cid:13)   (cid:13)d other images [60]. Due to the advent of DL, Gatys et al.
(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) √ (cid:13) [61] proposed a style transfer method (e.g., painting style) (cid:112) L (x,y ) = E (cid:13)ϕ x, γ · y + 1 − γ · (cid:15),γ − (cid:15)(cid:13) , that utilized a pre-trained neural network ϕ. Based on that, SR 3 0 (cid:15),γ (cid:13) θ  0  (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) Enhance Net [12] used the texture loss to enforce textural =y (cid:101)by Equation 34 d (35) similarity. It uses the Gram Matrix to capture correlations of where d ∈ {1,2}. The alternative regression target y different channels between feature maps: 0 remains open for future research.
(cid:88) Gl (y) = ϕl (y) · ϕl (y) (31) The refinement process p is the reverse direction of (c ,c ) (i,j,c ) (i,j,c ) 1 2 1 2 (i,j,.)∈Ω y the diffusion process. Given the prediction of (cid:15) t by ϕ θ , Equation 34 can be reformulated to approximate y : 0 where ϕl is the l-th feature map. The texture loss is √ (cid:112) y = γ · yˆ + 1 − γ · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) t t 0 t θ t t (cid:13) (cid:13)2 L (y,yˆ,l) = (cid:13)Gl (yˆ) − Gl (y)(cid:13) (32) 1 (cid:16) (cid:112) (cid:17) (36) TEX (cid:13) (cid:13) ⇐⇒ yˆ = √ · y − 1 − γ · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) 2 0 t t θ t t γ t Substituting yˆ into the posterior distribution to parameter 3.3 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models 0 ize the mean of p (y |y ,x), details shown in supplemenθ t−1 t Interestingly, DL methods are well suited for denoising tary material, yields Gaussian noise. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (cid:20) (cid:21) 1 1 − α (DDPM s) [62] exploit this insight by formulating a Markov µ (x,y ,γ ) = √ y − √ t · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) (37) θ t t t θ t t α 1 − γ chain to alter one image into a noise distribution gradually, t t and the other way around. The idea of this approach is that The authors of SR 3 set the variance of p (y |y ,x) to θ t−1 t estimating small perturbations is more tractable for neural (1 − α ) for the sake of simplicity. As a result, each refinet networks than explicitly describing the whole distribution ment step with (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I) is realized as t with a single, non-analytically-normalizable function.
1 (cid:20) 1 − α (cid:21) √ First in SR was “Super-Resolution via Repeated Refine- y ← √ y − √ t · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) + 1 − α · (cid:15) t−1 t θ t t t t α 1 − γ ment” (SR 3) [63]. It adds noise to the LR image until y ∼ t t T (38) N (0,I) and generates a target HR image y iteratively in T 0 And indeed, SR 3 generates sharp images with more refinement steps. While adding noise is straightforward, it details than its regression-based counterparts on natural uses a DL-based model that transforms a standard normal and face images. The authors also strengthened the results distribution into an empirical data distribution by reverting by positively testing the generated images with 50 human the noise-adding process as shown in Figure 2.
subjects. Thus, the outcome of SR 3 is a promising direction The diffusion process q adds Gaussian noise to a LR for future investigations. Nevertheless, SR 3 seems prone to image y = y over T iterations with 0 bias, e.g., applied to a facial dataset; the images result in √ q (y |y ) = N (y | γ · y ,(1 − γ ) · I), (33) too smooth skin texture by dropping moles, pimples, and t 0 t t 0 t piercings. More extensive ablation studies could help in (cid:81)T where γ = α and 0 < α < 1 are hyper-parameters t i=1 i t establishing the practicality for real-world SR applications.
to determine the variance of added noise per iteration.
Consequently, the noisy image y can be expressed as (cid:101) 4 UPSAMPLING √ (cid:112) y = γ · y + 1 − γ · (cid:15), (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I) (34) A critical aspect is how to increase the spatial size of a given (cid:101) 0 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) feature map. This section gives an overview of upsampling mean variance IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 7 methods, either interpolation-based (nearest-neighbor, bilin- in the channel dimension, which can be more efficient for ear, and bicubic interpolation) or learning-based (transposed smaller kernel sizes than transposed convolution. However, convolution, sub-pixel layer, and meta-upscale). Various assume zero values are used instead of nearest-neighbor visualizations can be found in the supplementary material. interpolation in the transposed convolution. In that case, a transposed convolution can be simplified to a sub-pixel layer [67]. Given a scaling factor s and input channel size 4.1 Interpolation-based Upsampling c, it produces a feature map with s 2 · c channels. Next, a Many DL-based SR models use image interpolation methconvolution operation with zero padding is applied, such ods because of their simplicity. The most known methods that the spatial size of the input and the resulting feature are nearest-neighbor, bilinear, and bicubic interpolation.
map remains the same. Finally, it reshapes the feature map Nearest-neighbor interpolation is the most straightforto produce a spatially upsampled output. The receptive field ward algorithm because the interpolated value is based on of the convolutional layer can be arbitrary but is often 1×1 its nearest pixel values. Nearest-neighbor is swift since no or 3 × 3. This procedure is widely known in the literature calculations are needed, which is why it is favorable for SR as pixel shuffle layer [38], [53], [63]. In practice, the submodels [12]. However, there are no interpolated transitions, pixel layer produces repeating artifacts that can be difficult which results in blocky artifacts.
to unlearn for deeper layers, which is also further explained In contrast, bilinear interpolation bypasses blocky artiin the supplementary material.
facts by producing smoother transitions with linear interpolation on both axes. It needs a receptive field of 2×2, making 4.2.3 Decomposed Upsampling it relatively fast and easily applicable [64].
An extension to the above approaches is decomposed trans However, SR methods typically do not use it because posed convolution [68]. Using 1 D convolutions instead of bicubic interpolation delivers much smoother results. But it 2 D convolutions reduces the number of operations and demands much more computation time due to a receptive parameters for the component k 2 to 2 · k. Note that the apfield size of 4×4 and makes it the slowest approach among plied decomposition is not exclusively bound to transposed all three methods. Nonetheless, it is generally used by SR convolution and can also be used in sub-pixel layers.
models if an interpolation-based upsampling is applied [39], [44], [65] since the overall time consumption is unessential 4.2.4 Attention-based Upsampling for GPU-based models, which are common in SR research.
Another alternative to transposed convolution is attentionbased upsampling [69]. It follows the definition of attention 4.2 Learning-based Upsampling based convolution (or scaled dot product attention) and Learning-based upsampling introduces modules that up- replaces the 1 x 1 convolutions with upsampling methods. In sample a given feature map within a learnable setup. more detail, it replaces the convolution for the query matrix The most standard learning-based upsampling methods are with bilinear interpolation and the convolution for the key the transposed convolution and sub-pixel layer. Promising and value matrix with zero-padding upsampling similar alternatives are meta-upscaling, decomposed upsampling, to transposed convolution. It needs fewer parameters than attention-based upsampling, and upsampling via Look-Up transposed convolution but a slightly higher number of Tables, which are the last discussed methods in this section. operations. Also, it trains considerably slower: a shared issue across attention mechanisms.
4.2.1 Transposed Convolution 4.2.5 Upsampling with Look-Up Tables Transposed convolution expands the spatial size of a given feature map and subsequently applies a convolution oper- A recently proposed alternative is to use a Look-Up Table ation. In general, the expansion is realized by adding zeros (LUT) to upsample [70]. Before generating the LUT, a smallbetween given values. However, some approaches differ scale SR model is trained to upscale small patches of a by first applying nearest-neighbor interpolation and then LR image to target HR patches. Subsequently, the LUT is applying zero-padding, e.g., FSRCNN [33]. The receptive created by saving the results of the trained SR model applied field of the transposed convolution layer can be arbitrary on a uniformly distributed input space. It reduces the up- (often set to 3 × 3). The added values depend on the kernel sampling runtime to the time necessary for memory access size of the subsequent convolution operation. This proce- while achieving better quality than bicubic interpolation. On dure is widely known in literature and is also called de- the other hand, it requires additional training to create the convolution layer, although it does not apply deconvolution LUT. Also, the size of the small patches is crucial since the [39], [40], [43]. In practice, transposed convolution layers size of the LUT increases exponentially. However, it is an tend to produce crosshatch artifacts due to zero-padding exciting approach that is worth further exploration.
(further discussed in the supplementary material). Also, the upsampled feature values are fixed and redundant. The sub- 4.2.6 Flexible Upsampling pixel layer was proposed to circumvent this problem.
Most existing SR methods only consider fixed, integer scale factors s ∈ N . However, most real-world scenarios require 4.2.2 Sub-Pixel Layer flexible zooming, which demands SR methods that can Introduced with ESPCN [66], it uses a convolution layer be applied with arbitrary scale factors s ∈ R+ . It raises to extract a deep feature map and rearranges it to return a significant problem for models that use those learningan upsampled output. Thus, the expansion is carried out based upsampling methods: one has to train and save IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 8 various models for different scales, which limits the use of such methods for real-world scenarios [37], [66]. In order to overcome this limitation, a meta-upscale module was proposed [41]. It predicts a set of filters for each position in a feature map that is later applied to a location in a lower-resolution feature map. A visualization of the upscale module and the aforementioned steps can be found in the supplementary material. This approach is exciting for tasks that require arbitrary magnification levels, e.g., zooming.
Nevertheless, its downsides unfold if huge scaling factors are required because it has to predict the filter weights W (i,j) independently for each position. There are only a Fig. 4. Spatial-attention mechanism [76]. It extracts informations by few works [71] that involve this approach in the literature.
inspecting the relationship between two positions (first matrix multipli Besides existing SR methods, one can treat each image as cation) and returns the importance of each position as a feature map a continuous function and generate patches at a fixed pixel (second matrix multiplication). MM denotes the matrix multiplication.
resolution around a center like Any Res-GAN (2022) [72], which could be an interesting path to follow for future SR research. The principle is shown in Figure 4. Intuitively, the resulting feature map contains each position’s weighted sum of features. It captures spatially separated information by a 5 ATTENTION MECHANISMS FOR SR long range in the feature map. In SR, the Residual Non-local Attention revolutionized Natural Language Processing Attention Network (RNAN) [77] was the first architecture (NLP) and plays an essential role for DL in several appliusing non-local spatial attention to improve performance.
cations [73]. This section presents how SR methods employ A known architecture is Swin IR [78], which reaches attention. There are two categories: Channel and spatial state-of-the-art performance and follows the idea of transattention, which can be applied simultaneously.
formers (i.e., multi-head self-attention [73]) more strictly by applying a sequence of multiple swin transformer layers.
5.1 Channel-Attention Swin FIR [79] develops this idea further with fast fourier Feature maps generated by CNN s are not equally important. convolutions. Since transformers originate from NLP, their Therefore, essential channels should be weighted higher natural application is restricted to a sequence of patches, than counterpart channels, which is the goal of channel and therefore, it requires a patch-wise formulation of an imattention. It focuses on “which” (channels) carry crucial de- age. This is a significant drawback of transformers applied tails. Hu et al. [74] introduced the channel-attention mecha- to SR. Swin IR diminishes the problem by shifting between nism for CV as an add-on module for any CNN architecture. attention blocks to transfer knowledge between patches.
Figure 3 illustrates the principle. Upon this, the Residual Exploring its full potential is an exciting topic for the Channel Attention Network (RCAN) [37] firstly applied the future [80], [81]. However, one major drawback is the channel-attention to SR. They used a second-order feature difficulty of measuring the importance at a global spatial metric to reduce the spatial size and applied two fully con- scale since it often requires vector multiplications (along nected layers to extract the importance weighting. Because rows and columns), which is slow for large-scale images.
of its simple add-on installation, it is still in use for current Bottleneck tricks and patch-wise applications are used to research [75]. One interesting future direction of channel- circumvent this problem but are also sub-optimal for imporattention would be to combine it with pruning in order to tance weighting. Future research should further optimize not only amplify quality but also to save computation time. computation speed without forfeiting global information.
5.2 Spatial-Attention 5.3 Mixed Attention In contrast to channel attention, spatial attention focuses Since both attention types can be applied easily, merging on “where” the input feature maps carry important details, them into one framework is natural. Thus, the model focuses which requires extracting global information from the input.
on “which” (channel) is essential and “where” (spatially) Therefore, Wang et al. [76] proposed non-local attention, to extract the most valuable features. This combines the similar to self-attention for NLP, following the idea of benefits of both approaches and introduces an exciting field Query-Key-Value-paradigm known from transformers [73].
of research, especially in SR [82], [83]. One potential future direction would be to introduce attention mechanisms incorporating both concerns in one module.
A well-known architecture for mixed attention is the Holistic Attention Network (HAN) [82], which uses hierarchical features (from residual blocks) and obtains dependencies between features of different depths while allocating Fig. 3. Channel-attention mechanism [74]. It reduces a feature map in attention weights to them. Thus, it weighs the importance the spatial dimensions and extracts weighting values by using several of depth layers in the residual blocks instead of spatial loca FC layers that are element-wise multiplied to the initial feature map.
tions within one feature map. Finally, the network uses the IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 9 layer attention weighted feature map and combines it via 6.5 Multi-Task Learning addition with channel attention before the final prediction.
Multi-task learning is an exciting research area for SR with the core idea to train a given model to perform various tasks 6 ADDITIONAL LEARNING STRATEGIES [52], [85]. E.g., one can assign a label to each image and use multiple datasets for training. Next, a SR model can Additional learning strategies are blueprints that can be learn to reconstruct the SR image and predict its category used in addition to regular training. This section presents (e.g., natural or manga image) [89]. Another idea is to use the most common methods used in SR, which can imdatasets that have access to salient image boundaries or mensely impact an SR model’s overall performance.
image segmentation and use features extracted from the model to predict these [90]. Research on self-learning is an 6.1 Curriculum Learning interesting starting point to combine ideas with SR.
Curriculum learning follows the idea of training a model under easy conditions and gradually involving more com 6.6 Normalization Techniques plexity [84], i.e., additional scaling sizes. For instance, a model trains with a scale of two and gradually higher A slight change in the input distribution is a cause of many scaling factors, e.g., Pro SR [53]. ADRSR [85] concatenates issues because layers need to continuously adapt to new all previously computed HR outputs. CARN [86] updates distributions, which is known as covariate shift and can the HR image in sequential order, where additional layers be alleviated with Batch Norm [91]. While Batch Norm helps extend the network for four times upsampling, which uses in tasks like image classification, it is frequently used for previously learned layers, but ignores previously computed SR [13], [52], [92]. However, Batch Norm does not apply HR images [53]. Another way of using curriculum learning well in SR because it removes network range flexibility by is gradually increasing the noise in LR images, e.g., in normalizing features [38]. The performance of a SR model SRFBN [64]. Curriculum learning can shorten the training can be increased substantially without Batch Norm [93].
time by reducing the difficulty of large scaling factors. Recently, the authors of Adaptive Deviation Modulator (Ada DM) [94] studied this phenomenon and were able 6.2 Enhanced Predictions to show that the standard deviation of residual features shrinks a lot after normalization layers (including Batch Instead of enhancing simple input-output pairs, one can use Norm, layer, instance, and group normalization), which data augmentation techniques like rotation and flipping for causes the performance degradation in SR. The standard final prediction. More specifically, create a set of images via deviation resembles the amount of variation of pixel values, data augmentation of one image, e.g., rotation. Next, let the which primarily affects edges in images. They proposed a SR model reconstruct images of the set. Finally, inverse the module within a feature extraction block to address this data augmentation via transformations and derive a final problem and amplify the pixel deviation of normalized prediction, i.e., the mean [40], or the median [87].
features. It calculates a modulated output y by (cid:101) 6.3 Learned Degradation y = y · eϕ[log(σ[x])], (39) (cid:101) So far, this work assumed learning processes from LR to where x is the residually propagated input, σ [x] its stan HR. The Content Adaptive Resampler (CAR) [7] introduced dard deviation along all three axes, and ϕ a learnable feature a resampler for downscaling. It predicts kernels to produce extraction module. The logarithmic scaling guarantees stadownscaled images according to its HR input. Next, a SR ble training. As a result, it is possible to apply normalization model takes the LR image and predicts the SR image.
layers to state-of-the-art SR models and to achieve sub Thus, it simultaneously learns the degradationmapping and stantial performance improvements. One limitation is the upsampling task. The authors demonstrate that the CAR additional GPU memory during training, roughly two times framework trained jointly with SR networks improves statethe size. Therefore, lightweight normalization techniques of-the-art SR performance furthermore.
similar to Ada DM, but with less GPU memory consumption are of high interest for future research.
6.4 Network Fusion Another way of improving performance is to apply multiple SR models. Network fusion uses the output of all additional 7 SR MODELS SR models and applies a fusion layer to the outputs. Finally, This section presents the most technical part: How to conit predicts the SR image used for the learning objective. For struct an SR model? In the beginning, we introduce different instance, the Context-wise Network Fusion (CNF) [88] uses frameworks that all architectures need to apply, which is this approach with SRCNN, a small SR model introduced in the location of the upsampling itself. After that, it chronothe next chapter. This method adds a considerable amount logically examines different architecture types. Additional of computation and memory, depending on the complexity visualizations can be found in the supplementary material of the SR models. However, it achieves a performance and an overview benchmark in Table 1.
boost and is recommended if computational resources are sufficiently available. A potential future direction would 7.1 Upsampling Location be to use network fusion to determine critical computation paths and to merge multiple networks into one by pruning Besides the choice of the upsampling method, one crucial or dropout mechanisms. decision in designing SR models is where to place the IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 10 Fig. 5. Visualization of different upsampling locations within a neural network: (upper left) post-upsampling, (bottom left) pre-upsampling, (upper right) progressive upsampling, and (bottom right) iterative upand-down upsampling.
upsampling in the architecture. There are four variants Fig. 6. Architecture designs of SRCNN [39], FSRCNN [33], ESPCN [66] and Lap SRN/MS-Lap SRN [44]. They are grouped together in this explored in SR literature [4]: Pre-, post-, progressive, and work as simple network designs, because they use only convolutional iterative up-and-down upsampling. They are shown in Figoperations and upsampling methods.
ure 5 and discussed next. An additional overview table can be found in the supplementary material.
Pre-Upsampling In a pre-upsampling framework, up- Iterative Up-and-Down Upsampling Learning the mapsampling is applied in the beginning. Hereafter, it uses ping from HR to LR helps to understand the relation from a composition of convolution layers to extract features. LR to HR [95]. Iterative up-and-down upsampling uses this Since the feature maps match the spatial size of the HR insight by also downsampling within the architecture. It image early, the convolutional layers focus on refining the is found mainly within recurrent-based network designs upsampled input. Thus, it eases learning difficulty but [96], [97] and demonstrated significant improvement comintroduces blur and noise amplification in the upsampled pared to the previous upsampling techniques. However, the image, which impacts the final result. Also, models trained proper use requires further exploration. It can be applied with pre-upsampling have less performance or application with other frameworks, an interesting avenue for future issues than other frameworks since they use DL to refine research.
independently of the scaling in the beginning. However, it also comes with high memory and computational costs com 7.2 Simple Networks pared to other frameworks like post-upsampling because of the larger input for feature extraction. Simple networks are architectures that mainly apply a chain Post-Upsampling Post-upsampling lowers memory and of convolutions. They are easy to understand and typically computation costs by upsampling at the end, which results use a bare minimum of computational resources due to their in feature extractions in lower dimensional space. Due to size. Most of these architectures can be found in the early this advantage, this framework decreases the complexity of days of DL-based SR because their performances are below SR models, e.g., FSRCNN [33]. However, the computational state-of-the-art. Also, the “the deeper, the better” paradigm burden advances for multi-scaling, where approximations of DL does not apply well for simple networks because at different scales are required. A step-wise upsampling of vanishing/exploding gradients [98]. Figure 6 shows the during the feed-forward process was proposed to alleviate different simple network designs. The first CNN introduced this issue, the so-called progressive upsampling. for SR datasets was SRCNN (2014) by Dong et al. [39].
Progressive Upsampling Unlike pre- and post- It uses bicubic pre-upsampling to match the ground-truth upsampling, progressive upsampling gradually increases spatial size (see Figure 7.1). Subsequently, it consists of the feature map size within the architecture. Cascaded three convolution layers, which followed a popular strategy CNN-based modules typically enhance to a single scaling in image restoration: patch extraction, non-linear mapping, factor. Its output is the input for the next module, typically and reconstruction. The authors of SRCNN claimed that apbuilt similarly. Thus, it segregates the upscaling problem plying more layers hurts the performance, which contradicts into small tasks, which is a perfect fit for multi-scale SR the DL paradigm “the deeper, the better” [99]. As seen in tasks. Also, it reduces the learning difficulty for convolu- the following, this observation was false and required more tional layers. However, the benefit is limited to the highest advanced building blocks to work correctly, e.g., residual set scale, and higher scaling factors also require deeper connections like in VDSR [98]. In their follow-up paper, architectures. the authors explored various ways to speed up SRCNN, IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 11 Fig.7. Architecturedesignof VDSR[98].Itappliesadeepconvolutional network as feature extractor but also uses a residual from the input to the final prediction. Therefore, the feature extractor can concentrate to add high-frequency details onto the interpolated image.
resulting in FSRCNN (2016) [33] that utilized three major tricks: First, they reduced the kernel size of convolution layers. Second, they used a 1 x 1 convolution layer to enhance and reduce the channel dimension before and after a feature processing with 3 x 3 convolutions. Third, they applied postupsampling with transposed convolution, which is the main Fig. 8. Pixel value distribution of an example image from BSDS 100 [2].
It can be observed that the distribution of the LR and HR image are reason for the speed up (see Figure 7.1). Surprisingly, they skewed. In contrary, the distribution of the difference between LR and outperformed SRCNN while obtaining faster computation.
HR looks normally distributed, which is easier learned by an SR model.
A year later, Lap SRN (2017) [44] was proposed with a key contribution of a Laplacian pyramid structure [100] that enables progressive upsampling (see Figure 7.1). It merit emitted a trend for following residual networks that takes coarse-resolution feature maps as input and predicts enhance the number of residuals used.
high-frequency residuals that progressively refine the SR One example is RED-Net (2016) [101], which adapts the reconstruction at each pyramid level. To this end, predicting U-Net [102] architecture to SR. It incorporates a downsammulti-scale images in one feed-forward pass is feasible, pling encoder and an upsampling decoder network, which thereby facilitating resource-aware applications.
downsamples the given output to extract features and then Simple network architecture designs are found primarupsamples the feature maps to a target spatial size. During ily in the early days of DL-based SR because of their this process, RED-Net extends the upsample operation with limited capacity to learn complex structures due to their residual information acquired throughout the downsample size. Recently, researchers focused on networks with more procedure, which reduces vanishing gradients. As a result, depth, either with residual networks or synthetic depth with it outperforms SRCNN for several scaling factors.
recurrent-based networks. The following sections introduce Another example adapted Res Net [103], which consists both possibilities.
of multiple residual units, and Dense Net [104], which sends residual information to all later appearing convolution op 7.3 Residual Networks erations, in the publication of SRGAN (2016) [13]. Moreover, Residual networks use skip connections to jump over lay- the authors compared these architectures applied with pixel ers. The primary reason behind adding skip connections and adversarial loss (see Section 3). SRR es Net consists of is two-fold: To avoid vanishing gradients and mitigate the multiple stacked residual units that allow high-level feature accuracy saturation problem [99]. For SR, introducing skip extractions to access low-level feature information through connections unlocked the world of deep-constructed mod- numerous summation operations. Therefore, it eases optiels. The main advantage is that deep architectures substitute mization by providing an easy back-propagation path to convolutions with large receptive fields, which are crucial early layers. Like SRR es Net, SRD ense Net [40] applies dense for capturing important features. The authors of SRCNN residual blocks, which utilize even more residual connecstated that the “the deeper, the better” paradigm does not tions to allow direct paths to earlier layers. In comparison, hold to SR. In contrast, Kim et al. refuted this statement SRR es Net outperforms SRCNN, DRCN, and ESPCN by a with VDSR (2015) [98] and showed that very deep networks large margin. An extension to SRD ense Net is the Residual could significantly improve SR, visualized in Figure 7. Dense Network [42], proposed in 2018, which incorporates They used two insights from other DL approaches: an additional residual connection upon the dense block.
First, they applied a famous architecture VGG-19 [24] as The Densely Residual Laplacian Network (DRLN) [6] is a feature extraction block. Second, they used a residual an extension of SRD ense Net and a post-upsampling, chanconnection from the interpolation layer to the last layer. nel attention-based residual network and achieves com As a result, the VGG-19 feature extraction block adds high- petitive results regarding state-of-the-art. Each dense block frequency details to the interpolation, resulting in a target is followed by a module based on Laplacian pyramid atdistribution that is normal and reduces the learning diffi- tention, which learns inter and intra-level dependencies culty immensely, as shown in Figure 8. Also, it diminishes between feature maps. It weights sub-band features provanishing/exploding gradients due to the sparse represen- gressively in each DRLM, similar to HAN (concatenating tation of the high-frequency added to the interpolation. This various feature maps of different depths).
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 12 DRNN trains more stable and with deeper recursions than DRCN (52 in total) by emphasizing multi-path.
Inspired by DRCN, Tai et al. introduced Mem Net (2017) [92]. The main contribution is a memory block consisting of recursive and gate units to mine persistent memory. The recursive unit is applied multiple times, similar to DRCN.
The outputs are concatenated and sent to a gate unit, which is a simple 1 x 1 convolution layer. The adaptive gate unit controls the amount of prior information and the current state reserved. Figure 9 visualizes Mem Net. The effect of introducing gates was groundbreaking for sequence-tosequence tasks (e.g., LSTM [106]) but deeply understanding its effect on SR tasks marks an open research question.
Inspired by DRRN, the authors of DSRN (2018) [97] explored a dual-state design with a multi-path network. It introduces two states, one operating in HR and one in LR space, which jointly exploits both LR and HR signals. The Fig. 9. Recurrent-based architecture designs of DRCN [105] (upper signals are exchanged recurrently between both spaces, LR left), DRRN [65] (upper right), and Mem Net [92] (bottom). The DRCN applies the same convolutional layer multiple times. The DRNN extends to-HR and HR-to-LR, via delayed feedback [107]. From LR this idea to recursive application of a residual block. The Mem Net intro- to-HR, it uses a transposed convolution layer to upsample.
duces a gate unit to distill most important features from all intermediate HR-to-LR is performed via strided convolutions. The final convolution results in a recursive manner.
approximation uses the average of all estimations done in the HR space. Thus, it applies an extended formulation of iterative up-and-down upsampling (see Figure 7.1). The Another variant of residual blocks is the Information two states use more parameters than DRRN, but less than Distillation Network (IDN) [43]. It employs residual con DRCN. However, exploiting the dual-state design approprinections to accumulate a portion of a feature map to later ately requires more exploration in the future.
layers. Given six convolution layers, it divides the feature The Super-Resolution Feedback Network (SRFBN, 2019) map into two parts in the middle. Then, one part is pro- [64]is also using feedback [108]. The essential contribution cessed further by the last three layers and added to the is the feedback block (FB) as an actual recurrent cell. The FB concatenation of the input and the other part. In brief, uses multiple iterative up-and-downsamplings with dense networks that utilize residual connections are state-of-theskip connections to produce high-level discriminant feaart. Their ability to efficiently propagate information helps tures. The SRFBN generates a SR image for each iteration, fight vanishing/exploding gradients, resulting in excellent and the FB block receives the previous iteration’s output. It performances. Sometimes, residual block usage is combined tries to generate the same SR image for single degradation with other architectures, such as recurrent-based networks.
tasks in each iteration. For more complex cases, it trains to return better and better quality images with each iteration via curriculum learning (see Section 6.1). SRFBN has shown 7.4 Recurrent-Based Networks significant improvement over the other frameworks but Artificial depth can be accomplished with recurrence, where requires more research in the future.
the receptive field, crucial for capturing important infor Liu et al. proposed NLRN (2018) [109] that provides a mation, is enlarged by repeating the same operation. Also, non-local module to produce feature correlation for selfrecurrence reduces the number of parameters, which helps similarity. Each position in the image measures the feature to combat overfitting and memory consumption for small correlation of each location in its neighborhood. NRLN devices. It is achieved by applying a convolution layer utilizes adjacent recurrent stages between the feature corremultiple times without introducing new parameters.
lation messages. And indeed, NLRN achieved slightly better The first recurrent-based network for SR was introduced performances than DRCN, DRCN, and Mem Net.
with DRCN (2015) by Kim et al. [105]. It uses the same Nevertheless, primary research on RNN s in SR is lately convolution layer up to 16 times, and a subsequent re- driven for MISR, such as video SR [110] or meta-learning construction layer considers all recursive outputs for fi- [111] related tasks. In general, recurrent-based networks are nal estimation. However, they observed that their deeply- interesting for saving parameters, but the major drawback recursive network is hard to train but eased it with skip is their computational overhead by repeatedly applying the connections and recursive supervision, essentially auxiliary same operation. Also, they are not parallelizable due to the training. Figure 9 visualizes DRCN. time dependency. Alternatives are lightweight architectures, Combining the core ideas of DRCN [105] and VDSR which are introduced next.
[98], DRRN (2017) [65] utilizes several stacked residual units in a recursive block structure. In addition, it uses 6 x and 7.5 Lightweight Networks 14 x fewer parameters than VDSR and DRCN, respectively, while obtaining better results. Contrary to DRCN, DRRN So far, we have introduced models that increase the quality shares weight sets among residual units instead of one of SR images and a few that try to do the same, but with shared weight for all recursively-applied convolution layers. less computational effort. For instance, FSRCNN [33] was IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 13 Fig. 11. Design of cascading blocks [112]. It is a densely connected block, which consists of Residual-E blocks [112] and 1 x 1 convolutions that take as input the Residual-E block’s output and the residual connections from the layers before. The Residual-E block itself is built like a residual unit but performs group convolution, which is efficient in inference time, depending on the group size.
Fig. 10. Architecture design of MDSR [38]. It utilizes multi-path learning toselectbetweenmultiplescalingfactorpaths (denotedby 2 x,3 x, 4 xon the bottom right of the blue boxes). Also, all paths share an intermediate feature extraction block to save parameters.
built to be faster than SRCNN [39] by utilizing smaller kernel sizes, post-upsampling, and 1 x 1 convolution layers for enhancing/reducing the channel dimension (see Section 7.2). Another example in this work was recurrent-based networks that reduce redundant parameters as described in Fig. 12. Visualization of the RFDB block [114]. It uses a multi-path Section 7.4. The downside of those lean recurrent networks approach to distill features with 1 x 1 convolutions and introduces a is that parameter reduction comes at the expense of in- shallow representation of the residual block, which consists of only one creased operations and inference time, an essential aspect of 3 x 3 convolution. In the end, all intermediate results are combined with one 1 x 1 convolution layer and an enhanced spatial attention [114] layer.
real-world scenarios. E.g., SR on mobile devices is limited by battery capacity, which depends on the computation power needed. Therefore, lightweight architectures explicitly focus on both execution speed and memory usage. Supplemen- is almost identical to a global one. It allows multi-level tary materials include a parameter comparison, and a fair representations and stable training like for residual netcomparison of execution speed is in welcome demand. works. Ultimately, it chooses between three paths, which The MDSR (2017) [38] uses the multi-path approach upsample the feature map to 2 x, 3 x, or 4 x scaling factors via to learn multiple scaling factors with shared parameters. efficient sub-pixel layers similar to MDSR. Inspired by Mo It has three non-identical paths as pre-processing steps bile Net [113], CARN also uses grouped convolution in each and three paths for upsampling. For a given scaling factor residual block component. This allows configuration of the s ∈ {2,3,4}, MDSR is choosing deterministic between the model’s efficiency since choosing different group sizes and three paths. The paths for larger scales are built deeper than the resulting performances are in a trade-off relationship.
those for lower scaling factors. Between the pre-processing The residual blocks with group convolution can reduce the and upsampling steps is a shared module consisting of mul- computation up to 14 times, depending on the group size.
tiple residual blocks. This feature extraction block is trained They tested a variant of CARN, which sets the group size so and commonly used for all scaling factors, visualized in that the computation reduction is maximized and called it Figure 10. The main advantage is that one model is sufficient CARN-Mobile (CARN-M). Moreover, they further reduced to train on multiple scales, which saves parameters and CARN-M’s parameters by enabling weight-sharing of their memory. In contrast, other SR models must be trained inde- residual blocks within each cascading block (reduction by pendently on different scales and saved independently for up to three times compared to non-shared).
multi-scale applications. Nevertheless, adding a new scaling Inspired by IDN and IMDB [115], the RFDN (2020) [114] factor requires training from scratch. rethinks the IMDB architecture by using RFDB blocks as Other lightweight architectures adapt this idea to shown in Figure 12. RFDB blocks consist of feature distillaenable parameter-efficient multi-scale training, such as tion connections, which cascade 1 x 1 convolutions towards a CARN/CARN-M (2018) [112]. Moreover, it implements a final layer. Moreover, it uses shallow residual blocks (SRB s), cascading mechanism upon the residual network [103]. consisting of only one 3 x 3 convolution, to process a given CARN consists of multiple cascading blocks (see Figure 11) input further. The final layer is a 1 x 1 convolution layer that and 1 x 1 convolutions between them. The output of the combines all intermediate results. In the end, it applies the cascading blocks is sent to all subsequent 1 x 1 convolutions enhanced spatial attention [114], designed specifically for like in the cascading block itself. Thus, the local cascading lightweight models. The RFDN architecture comprises sub IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 14 sequent RFDB blocks and uses a post-upsampling framework with a final sub-pixel layer.
A very hardware-aware and quantization-friendly network is XLSR (2021) [116]. It applies multi-paths to ease the burden of the convolution operations and employs 1 x 1 convolution to combine them pixel-wise. Each convolution layer has a small filter size (8, 16, 27). After the combination, it splits the feature map and applies multi-paths Fig. 13. Visualization of DWSR [120]. It calculates wavelet coefficients again. A core aspect of XLSR is the end activation layer, and uses a CNN to calculate the difference in the average (DA), vertical (DV), horizontal (DH), and diagonal (DD) sub-bands. Next, it adds the which exploits quantization benefits. Quantization is useful initially calculated coefficients via residual connection to the difference since it can save parameters by using more miniature bit to derive the coefficients of the predicted SR image (SA, SV, SH, and representations [117]. Unfortunately, many mobile devices SD), which is obtained by using the reverse 2 D-DWT.
support 8-bit. Therefore, applying uint 8 quantization on SR models that performed well in float 32 or float 16 does not work. Clipped Re LU (constrained to a max value of 1) as the network applies to different input resolutions with varilast activation layer instead of the typical Re LU can dimish ous magnifications and shows robustness toward unknown this issue. Nevertheless, the authors recommend searching Gaussian blur, poses, and occlusions for MS-SR. The idea for other maximum values with further experiments. of multi-level wavelet CNNS can also be found in later Generally, there are plenty of ideas to make SR models publications, i.e., MWCNN (2018) [123].
lightweight yet to be discovered. They include simplifica- Following works apply a hybrid approach by mixing tions, quantization, and pruning of existing architectures. wavelet transform with other well-known SR methods.
Also, more resource-constrained devices and applications I.e., Zhang et al. proposed a wavelet-based SRGAN (2019) utilizing SR are a growing field of interest [118]. framework [124], which merged the advantages of SRGAN and wavelet decomposition. The generator uses an embedding network to process the input into feature maps, 7.6 Wavelet Transform-based Networks similar to Wavelet-SRN et. Next, it uses a wavelet prediction Different representations of images can bring benefits, such network to refine the coefficients, similar to DWSR. In 2020, as computational speed up. The wavelet theory gives a sta Xue et al. [125] combined wavelets with residual attention ble mathematical foundation to represent and store multiblocks that contain channel attention and spatial attention resolution images, depicting contextual and textural informodules (mixed attention, see the following Section 5) and mation [119]. Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) decomcalled their network WRAN. Over the last several years, the poses an image into a sequence of wavelet coefficients. The application of wavelets also found its way to Video SR [126].
most frequent wavelet in SR is the Haar wavelet, computed In general, wavelet transformations enable an efficient via 2 D Fast Wavelet Transform. The wavelet coefficients are representation of images. As a result, SR models using calculated by repeating the decomposition to each output this strategy often reduce the overall model size and comcoefficient iteratively. It captures image details in four subputational costs while reaching similar performances to bands: average (LL), vertical (HL), horizontal (LH), and state-of-the-art architectures. However, this research area diagonal (HH) information. One of the first networks that needs more exploration. For example, suitable normalizaworked with wavelet prediction was DWSR (2017) [120]. It tion techniques since the distribution of high-frequency subuses a simple network architecture to refine the differences bands and low-frequency sub-bands differ significantly or between the LR and HR image wavelet decompositions in a alternatives to convolution operations since they might be pre-upsampling framework. First, it calculates the wavelet inappropriate due to the sparse representation of the highcoefficients of the enlarged (with bicubic interpolation) LR frequency sub-bands.
image. Then it processes the wavelet coefficients with convolution layers. Next, it adds the initially calculated wavelet 8 UNSUPERVISED SUPER-RESOLUTION coefficients, which are beared with a residual connection.
Thus, the convolution layers learn additional details of the The astonishing performance of supervised SR is imputed coefficients. Finally, it applies the reverse process of 2 D- to their ability to learn natural image mainly from many DWT to obtain the SR image, as depicted in Figure 13. LR-HR image pairs, mostly with known degradation map Another approach was proposed with WIDN (2019) ping, which is often unknown in practice. Thus, supervised [121], which uses stationary wavelet transform instead of trained SR models are sometimes unreliable for practicable DWT to perform better. A more sophisticated model was use-cases. For instance, when the training dataset has LR proposed around the same time as DWSR with Wavelet- images generated without anti-aliasing (high-frequency is SRN et (2017) [122]. It provides an embedding network, con- preserved), then the SR model trained on that dataset is sisting of residual blocks, to generate feature maps from the not adequately suitable for real-world LR images generated LR image. Next, it applies DWT several times and utilizes with anti-aliasing (smoothed images). In addition, some spemultiple wavelet prediction networks. Finally, it applies cialized application areas lack LR-HR image pair datasets.
the reverse process and uses a transposed convolution for Therefore, there is a growing interest in unsupervised SR.
upsampling. The coefficients are employed to a wavelet- We examine briefly this field, for further reading inclusive based loss function, while the SR images are used for a flow-based methods (density estimation of degradation kertraditional texture and MSE loss function. As a result, their nels) we refer to the survey of Liu et al. [127].
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 15 Fig.14. Zero-Shot Super-Resolution(ZSSR)[87]and Deep Image Prior (DIP) [131]. ZSSR uses the LR image and downsamples it and the SR Fig.15. Visualizationof ESRN[137].Acontrollerderivesanarchitecture model learns to reverse the downsampling. For the final prediction of by selecting from a pre-set of various efficient residual blocks.
the SR image of the LR image, it is applied to the LR image directly.
DIP uses fixed noise as input and predicts the SR image, which is downsampled to optimize the difference between the downsampled image and a given LR image. The final prediction uses the SR model The trained CNN is then finally used directly on the LR to predict the SR image but skips the degradation mapping.
image. Surprisingly, this method reached better results than SRCNN and was close to VDSR.
Upon this, a Degradation Simulation Network (DSN, 8.1 Weakly-Supervised 2020) [133] based on depth information [134] was proposed Weakly-supervised methods use unpaired LR and HR imto avoid a pre-defined degradation kernel. It uses bi-cycle ages like WESPE (2018) [128]. WESPE consists of two genertraining to simultaneously learn the unknown degradation ators and two discriminators. The first generator takes a LR kernel and the reconstruction of SR images. The MZSR [135] image and super-resolves it. The output of the first generator merged the ZSSR setting with meta-learning and used an exconstitutes a SR image, but is also regularized with TV loss ternal dataset to learn different blur kernels, which is called [59]. The second generator takes the prediction of the first task distribution in the field of meta-learning. The SR model generator and performs the inverse mapping. The result of is then trained on the downsampled image similar to ZSSR the second generator is optimized via content loss [12] with with the blur kernel returned from the meta-test phase. The the original input, the LR image. The two discriminators profit of this approach is that it conducts the SR model to take the SR image of the first generator and are trained to learn specific information faster and performs better than distinguish between predictions and original HR images.
pure ZSSR. Zero-shot learning for SR marks an exciting area The first discriminator classifies inputs based on image for further research because it is highly practical, especially colors into SR or HR images. The second discriminator uses for applications where application-specific datasets are rare image textures [61] in order to classify.
or non-existent.
A similar approach is a cycle-in-cycle SR framework called Cin CGAN (2018) [52], based on Cycle GAN [129].
8.3 Deep Image Prior It uses a total of four generators and two discriminators.
Ulyanov et al. [131] proposed Deep Image Prior (DIP), The first generator takes a noisy LR image and maps it which contradicts the conventional paradigm of training to the clean version. The first discriminator is trained to a CNN on large datasets. It uses a CNN to predict the distinguish between clean LR images from the dataset and LR image when downsampled, given some random noise the predicted clean images. The second generator trains the instead of an actual image. Therefore, it follows the strategy inverse function. Thus, it generates the noisy image from the of ZSSR by using only the LR image. However, it fixes the predicted clean version, which closes the first cycle of a Cyinput to random noise and applies a fixed downsampling cle Gan. The third generator is of particular interest because method to the prediction. Moreover, it optimizes the difit is the actual SR model which upsamples the LR image ference between the downsampled prediction and the LR to HR. The second discriminator is trained to distinguish image. The CNN then produces the SR image without using between the predicted and the dataset’s HR images. The the fixed downsampling method. Thus, it generates an SR last generator maps the predicted HR image to the noisy image out of noise instead of transforming a raw image.
LR image, which closes the second cycle of a Cycle GAN.
The difference between ZSSR and DIP is highlighted in Besides its promising results and similar approaches [130], Figure 14. Surprisingly, the results were close to Lap SRN it requires further research to decrease learning difficulty [136]. Unfortunately, it is a theoretical publication about and computational cost.
image priors, and the approach is too slow to be useful for most practical applications, as the authors stated them 8.2 Zero-Shot selves. However, it does not exclude future ideas that could Zero-shot or one-shot learning is associated with training enhance the practicability of DIP concerning better image on objects and testing on entirely different objects from a reconstruction quality and especially runtime.
different class that was never observed. Ideally, a classifier trained on horses should recognize zebras if the knowledge 9 NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH “zebras look like striped horses” is transferred [132]. The first publication on Zero-Shot in SR is ZSSR (2017) [87]. Recently, a new field called Neural Architecture Search The goal was to train only on one image at hand, one of (NAS) has gained popularity, which aims to automatically a kind. The degradation mapping for ZSSR was chosen to derive designs instead of hand-designed Neural Networks be fixed, such as bicubic. ZSSR downsamples the LR image (NN s) created by human artistry [10]. Fortunately, NAS can and trains a CNN to reverse the degradation mapping. be applied to derive parts of SR models.