IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 1 Hitchhiker’s Guide to Super Resolution: Introduction and Recent Advances Brian B. , Federico , Stanislav , Sebastian , Jo¨rn , Andreas 1 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), TU Kaiserslautern, Germany Abstract—With the advent of Deep Learning (DL), Super Resolution (SR) has also become a thriving research area. However, despite promising results, the field still faces challenges that require further research, e.g., allowing flexible upsampling, more effective loss functions, and better evaluation metrics. We review the domain of SR in light of recent advances and examine stateoftheart models such as diffusion (DDPM) and transformerbased SR models. We critically discuss contemporary strategies used in SR and identify promising yet unexplored research directions. We complement previous surveys by incorporating the latest developments in the field, such as uncertaintydriven losses, wavelet networks, neural architecture search, novel normalization methods, and the latest evaluation techniques. We also include several visualizations for the models and methods throughout each chapter to facilitate a global understanding of the trends in the field. This review ultimately aims at helping researchers to push the boundaries of DL applied to SR.
Index Terms—Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence, Super Resolution, Deep Learning, Survey, IEEE, TPAMI.
(cid:70) 1 INTRODUCTION SUPERRESOLUTION (SR) is the process of enhancing ing objectives (pixel, uncertaintydriven, and content loss) Low Resolution (LR) images to High Resolution (HR). as well as more sophisticated objectives like adversarial The applications range from natural images , to highly loss and denoising diffusion probabilistic models. advanced satellite , and medical imaging . Despite its covers interpolation- and learningbased upsampling. Seclong history , SR remains a challenging task in computer tion 5 goes over the basic mechanisms of attention used vision because it is notoriously illposed: several HR images in SR. explains additional learning strategies, can be valid for any given LR image due to many aspects covering a variety of techniques that can be applied for perlike brightness and coloring , . The fundamental un- formance improvement. It discusses curriculum learning, certainties in the relation between LR and HR images pose enhanced predictions, network fusion, multitask learning, a complex research task. Thanks to rapid advances in Deep and normalization. introduces SR models. It goes Learning (DL), SR has made significant progress in recent through different architecture types, such as simple, residyears. Unfortunately, entry into this field is overwhelming ual, recurrentbased, lightweight, and wavelet transformbecause of the abundance of publications. It is knotty work based networks. Several graphical visualizations (also in to get an overview of the advantages and disadvantages supplementary material) accompany the chapter, highlightbetween publications. This work unwinds some of the most ing the difference between the proposed architectures. Secrepresentative advances in the crowded field of SR. tion 8 and introduce unsupervised SR and neural Existing surveys have primarily focused on classical architecture search combined with SR. Finally, this work methods , , whereas we, in contrast, concentrate exclu- summarizes and points to future directions in sively on DL methods given their proven superiority. The and .
most similar survey to this work is the one by Bashir et al.
, which itself is a logical continuation of Wang et al. .
2 SETTING AND TERMINOLOGY However, our work focuses on methods that have recently gained popularity: uncertaintydriven loss, advances in im- This section focuses on four questions: (1) What is SR? (2) age quality assessment methods, new datasets, denoising How good is a stated SR solution? (3) What SR datasets diffusion probabilistic models, advances in normalization are available to test the solution? (4) How are images repretechniques, and new architecture approaches. This work sented in SR?
also reviews pioneering work that combines neural archi- The first question introduces the fundamental definitions tecture search with SR, which automatically derives designs as well as the terminology that is specific to SR. The second instead of relying solely on human dexterity . Finally, relates to evaluation metrics that assess any proposed SR this work aims to give a broader overview of the field and solution, such as Peak Signalto Noise Ratio (PSNR) and highlight challenges as well as future trends. Structural Similarity Index (SSIM). The third question is lays out definitions and introduces known linked to numerous datasets that provide various data metrics used by most SR publications. This section also types, such as 8 K resolution images or video sequences. Last introduces datasets and data types found in SR research. but not least, the fourth question addresses different image presents commonly used regressionbased learn- representations (i.e., color spaces) that SR models can use.
3202 be F 41 ]VC.sc[ 2 v 13131.9022:vi Xra IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 2 2.1 Problem Definition: Super .2 Evaluation: Image Quality Assessment (IQA) Super Resolution (SR) refers to methods that can develop Many properties are associated with excellent image quality, High Resolution (HR) images from at least one Low- such as sharpness, contrast, or the absence of noise. Thus, Resolution (LR) image . The SR field divides into Sin- fair evaluation of SR models is challenging. This section gle Image Super Resolution (SISR) and Multi Image Super- shows different evaluation methods that fall under the Resolution (MISR). In SISR, one LR image leads to one umbrella term Image Quality Assessment (IQA). Broadly HR image, whereas MISR generates many HR images from speaking, IQA refers to any metric based on perceptual many LR images. Regarding popularity, most researchers assessments of human viewers, i.e., how realistic the image focus on SISR because its techniques are extendable to MISR. appears after applying SR methods. IQA can be subjective (e.g., human raters) or objective (e.g., formal metrics).
2.1.1 Single Image Super Resolution (SISR) 2.2.1 Mean Opinion Score (MOS) The goal of Single Image Super Resolution (SISR) is to scale up a given Low Resolution (LR) image x ∈ Rw¯×h¯×c to a Digital images are ultimately meant to be viewed by human High Resolution (HR) image y ∈ Rw×h×c , with w¯ ≤ w and beings. Thus, the most appropriate way of assessing images ¯ h ≤ h. Throughout this work, N = w · h · c defines the is a subjective evaluation , . One commonly used x amount of pixels of an image x ∈ Rw×h×c and Ω the set of subjective IQA method is the Mean Opinion Score (MOS).
x all valid positions in x: Human viewers rate images with quality scores, typically 1 (bad) to 5 (good). MOS is the arithmetic mean of all ratΩ = {(i,j,k) ∈ N 3|i ≤ h,j ≤ w,k ≤ c} (1) x 1 ings. Despite reliability, mobilizing human resources is time Let s ∈ N be a scaling factor, it holds that h = s · h ¯ and consuming and cumbersome, especially for large datasets.
1 w = s · w¯. Furthermore, let D : Rw×h×c → Rw¯×h¯×c be a 2.2.2 Peak Signalto Noise Ratio (PSNR) degradation mapping that describes the inherent relation Objectively assessing quality is of indisputable importance ship between the two entities LR (x) and HR (y): due to the massive amount of images produced in recent x = D(y;δ), (2) years and the weaknesses of subjective measurements. One in which δ are parameters of D that contain, for example, popular objective quality measurement is Peak Signaltothe scaling factor s and other elements like blur type. Noise Ratio (PSNR). It is the ratio between the maximum possible pixelvalue L (255 for 8 bit representations) and In practice, the degradation mapping is often unknown the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of reference images. Given and therefore modeled, e.g., with bicubic downsampling.
the approximation yˆ and the groundtruth y, PSNR is a The underlying challenge of SISR is to perform the inverse mapping of D. Unfortunately, this problem is illposed logarithmic quantity using the decibel scale [d B]: because one LR image can lead to multiple nonidentical HR L 2 images. The goal is to find a SR model M : Rw¯×h¯×c → PSNR(y,yˆ) = 10 · log 10 1 (cid:80) [y − yˆ ] 2 (5) Rw×h×c , s.t.: N y p∈Ω y p p yˆ = M(x;θ), (3) Although it is widely used as an evaluation criterion for SR models, it often leads to mediocre results in real where yˆ is the predicted HR approximation of the LR image scenarios. It focuses on pixellevel differences instead of x and θ the parameters of M.
mammalian visual perception, which is more attracted to For Deep Learning (DL), this translates into an optistructures . Subsequently, it correlates poorly with submization objective that minimizes the difference between jectively perceived quality. Slight changes in pixels (e.g., the estimation yˆ and the groundtruth HR image y under shifting) can lead to a significantly decreased PSNR, while a given loss function L: humans barely recognize the difference. Consequently, new ˆ θ = argmin L(yˆ,y) (4) metrics focus on more structural features within an image.
θ 2.2.3 Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) The setting is illustrated in the supplementary material.
The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) depends on three 2.1.2 Multi Image Super Resolution (MISR) relatively independent entities: luminance, contrast, and Multi Image Super Resolution (MISR) is the task of yielding structures . It is widely known and better meets the one or more HR images from many LR images . An requirements of perceptual assessment . SSIM estimates example is satellite imagery , where many LR examples for an image y the luminance µ as the mean of the intensity, y direct to a single HR prediction, a socalled manytoone while it is estimating contrast σ as its standard deviation: y approach. An alternative is the manytomany approach, 1 (cid:88) µ = y , (6) where many LR images lead to more than one HR image. It y p N y is usually employed for video sequence enhancing . The p∈Ω y LR images are generally of the same scene, e.g., multiple 1 (cid:88) 2 σ = [y − µ ] (7) satellite images of the same geographical location. Given a y N − 1 p y y sequence x = (x ,...,x ) with T ∈ N and x ∈ Rw¯×h¯×c , p∈Ω y 1 T 1 t 0 < t ≤ T, the task is to predict y = (y ,...,y ) with In order to compare the entities, the authors of SSIM intro 1 T(cid:48) T(cid:48) ∈ N and y ∈ Rw×h×c , 0 < t(cid:48) ≤ T(cid:48) . The most frequent duced a similarity comparison function S: 1 t(cid:48) case is T = T(cid:48) , where y is supposed to be the HR image of 2 · x · y + c t x . Generally, MISR is an extension of the SISR setting. S (x,y,c) = , (8) t x 2 + y 2 + c IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 3 where x and y are the compared scalar variables, and 2.2.5 Taskbased Evaluation (TBE) 2 c = (k · L) , 0 < k (cid:28) 1 is a constant to avoid instability. Alternatively, one can focus on taskoriented features. For Given a groundtruth image y and its approximation yˆ, the instance, one can measure quality differences from DL modcomparisons on luminance (C l ) and contrast (C c ) are els that solve other Computer Vision (CV) tasks like image classification. Other CV tasks can also benefit from includ C (y,yˆ) = S (µ ,µ ,c ) and C (y,yˆ) = S (σ ,σ ,c ) l y yˆ 1 c y yˆ 2 ing SR as a preprocessing step. Measuring the performance (9) on tasks, with and without SR, is yet another ingenious way where c ,c > 0. The empirical covariance 1 2 to measure the quality of an SR method. HR images provide 1 (cid:88) more details, which are highly desirable for CV tasks like σ = (y − µ ) · (yˆ − µ ), (10) y,yˆ p y p yˆ N − 1 object recognition . Nevertheless, it requires extra training y p∈Ω y steps, which can be avoided by using predefined features determines the structure comparison (C s ), expressed as the like those presented in the following section.
correlation coefficient between y and yˆ: σ + c 2.2.6 Evaluation with defined Features y,yˆ 3 C (y,yˆ) = , (11) s σ · σ + c One example is the Gradient Magnitude Similarity Dey yˆ 3 viation (GMSD) , which uses the pixelwise Gradient where c > 0. Finally, the SSIM is defined as: 3 Magnitude Similarity (GMS). Based on the variation of SSIM(y,yˆ) = [C (y,yˆ)] α · [C (y,yˆ)] β · [C (y,yˆ)] γ (12) local quality, which arises from the diversity of local image l c s structures, GMS calculates the gradient magnitudes with: where α > 0,β > 0 and γ > 0 are adjustable control param- (cid:113) 2 2 eters for weighting relative importance of all components. m (p) = (∇ x) + (∇ x) ,p ∈ Ω (14) x h p v p x 2.2.4 Learningbased Perceptual Quality (LPQ) where ∇ h x and ∇ v x are the horizontal and vertical gradient images of x, respectively. The GMS map, similar to Lately, researchers have tried to mitigate some weak points , is given by of MOS by using DL, the socalled Learningbased Perceptual Quality (LPQ). In essence, LPQ tries to approximate a GMS(y,yˆ) = S (m (p),m (p),c) (15) p y yˆ variety of subjective ratings by applying DL methods. One way is to use datasets that contain subjective scores, such as where c is a positive constant. The final IQA score is given , and a neural network to predict human rating by the average of the GMS map: scores, e.g., Deep QA or NIMA . 1 (cid:88) A significant drawback of LPQ is the limited availabil- GMSD(y,yˆ) = GMS(y,yˆ) (16) N p y ity of annotated samples. One can augment a smallsized p∈Ω y dataset by applying noise and ranking. Adding minimal An alternative is the Feature Similarity (FSIM) Index.
noise to an image should lead to poorer quality, making the It also uses gradient magnitudes, but combines them with noisy image and the original counterpart pairwise discrim Phase Congruency (PC), a local structure measurement, as inable. These pairs are called Quality Discriminable Image feature points . The phase congruency model postulates Pairs (DIP) . The DIP Inferred Quality (dip IQ) index uses a biologically plausible model of how human visual systems Rank Net , which is based on a pairwise learningtorank detect and identify image features. These features are peralgorithm . The authors of dip IQ show higher accuracy ceived where the Fourier components are maximal in phase.
and robustness in variationrich content than by training di An extension to FSIM is the Haar waveletbased Perceptual rectly on IQA databases like . Another example Similarity Index (Haar PSI), which uses a Haar wavelet deis Rank IQA , in which a Siamese Network is used composition to assess local similarities . Its authors claim to rank image quality by using artificial distortions.
that it outperforms stateoftheart IQA methods like SSIM Another inventive way to calculate the similarity beand FSIM in terms of execution time and higher correlations tween two images is to use DL to extract and compare feawith human opinion scores. They suggest that a multiscale tures. One wellknown representative is Learned Perceptual complexvalued wavelet filterbank directly influences the Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) , which uses L feature computation of FSIM in the computation of the Fourier maps generated by an extractor ϕ, e.g., VGG . Let H , W l l components. The approach is similar to FSIM but relies on be the height and width of the lth feature map, respectively, 2 D discrete Haar wavelet transform.
and α ∈ RC l a scaling vector, then LPIPS is formulated as l (cid:13) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:13)2 2.2.7 Multi Scale Evaluation L (cid:80) (cid:13)α (cid:12) ϕl (yˆ) − ϕl (y) (cid:13) (cid:88) h,w (cid:13) l h,w h,w (cid:13) LPIPS(y,yˆ) = 2 In practice, SR models usually superresolve to different H W l l scaling factors, known as Multi Scaling (MS). Thus, evaluatl=1 (13) ing metrics should address this scenario. The MSS tructural The authors showed that LPIPS aligns better with human Similarity (MSSSIM) index is a direct extension of judgments than PSNR or SSIM. However, the quality de- SSIM that incorporates MS. Compared to SSIM, it can be pends on the feature extractor underneath. more robust to variations in viewing conditions. It adds Another example is Deep Image Structure and Texture parameters that weight the relative importance of different Similarity (DISTS) , which combines spatial averages scales. MSSSIM applies a lowpass filter and downsamples (texture) with the correlations of feature maps (structure). the filtered image by a factor of 2 for every scale level IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 4 tried to combine the advantages of other color spaces. The first DL based SR model used the first channel of the YC b Cr space. It is standard to capture only the Y channel if YC b Cr is employed since focusing on structure instead of color is preferred. Recent SR models use the RGB color space, also because using something other than RGB color spaces is illdefined when comparing stateoftheart results if PSNR is used as evaluation metric , . Exploring other color spaces for DL based SR methods is nearly nonexistent, which presents an exciting research gap.
3 LEARNING OBJECTIVES The ultimate goal of SR is to provide a model that maps an LR image to an HR image. Therefore, the question naturally Fig.1. Exampleimagesfromdifferent SR datasets: , , arises: how to train a given SR model? The answer to this , , , and . The question is given in the following sections.
ratio of the size differences is preserved.
3.1 Regressionbased Objectives Regressionbased objectives attempt to model the relation 1 ≤ i ≤ s , where s is the largest scale. By doing so, max max between input and the desired output explicitly. The paramit calculates the contrast and structure comparisons at each eters of the SR model are estimated directly from the data, scale and the luminance comparison for the largest scale often by minimizing the L 1 and L 2 losses. While both loss s . MSSSIM is formulated as max functions are easily applicable, the results tend to be blurry.
s (cid:89) max We also discuss one way to mitigate this shortcoming, α β γ MSSSIM(y,yˆ) = C (y,yˆ) · C (y,yˆ) i·C (y,yˆ) i , l c,i s,i namely by modeling uncertainty into the loss function itself.
i=1 (17) 3.1.1 Pixel Loss where α>0, β >0 and γ >0 are adjustable control paramei i The pixel loss measures the pixelwise difference, as illusters. Similarly, the GMSD can be extended with trated in the supplementary material. There are two well- (cid:118) (cid:117)s known pixel loss functions in literature. The first one is the max MSGMSD(y,yˆ) = (cid:117) (cid:116) (cid:88) α · (GMSD (y,yˆ)) 2 , (18) Mean Absolute Error (MAE), or L 1 loss: i i i=0 1 (cid:88) L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | (19) L 1 p p N where α are adjustable control parameters and GMSD is y i i p∈Ω y the GMSD score at i scale .
th It takes the absolute differences between every pixel of both images and returns the mean value. The second wellknown 2.3 Datasets and Challenges pixel loss function is the Mean Squared Error (MSE), or L 2 loss. It weights highvalue differences higher than lowvalue For SR, more extensive datasets have been made available differences due to an additional square operation: over the past years. Various accessible datasets contain vast amounts of images of different qualities and content, as 1 (cid:88) 2 L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | (20) L 2 p p shown in . Some are created explicitly for SR in a N y p∈Ω y supervised manner with LRHR pairs. Moreover, one can However, it is more common to see the L 1 loss in literature exploit datasets that do not come with SR annotations by because L 2 is very reactive to extraordinary values: too generating LR pairs and treating original samples as the smooth for low values and too variable for high values HR version. LR samples are typically computed using bicu- , . There are variants in the literature, depending bic interpolation, and antialiasing . The supplementary on the task and other specifications. A popular one is the material list commonly used datasets. Some of them were Charbonnierloss , which is defined by published as part of a SR challenge. Two of the most famous challenges are the New Trends in Image Restoration and 1 (cid:88) (cid:113) 2 L (y,yˆ) = |y − yˆ | + (cid:15)2, (21) Charbonnier p p Enhancement (NTIRE) challenge , and the Perceptual N y p∈Ω Image Restoration and Manipulation (PIRM) challenge . y where 0 < (cid:15) (cid:28) 1 is a small constant such that the inner term is nonzero. can be seen as a special case 2.4 Color Spaces of Charbonnier with (cid:15) = 0.
Applications of SR can expand into other domains with Pixel loss functions favor a high PSNR because both additional modalities such as depth- or hyperspectral SR. formulations use pixel differences. Also, PSNR does not However relevant, we restrict the scope of this review to correlate well with subjectively perceived quality (see Secthe more prevalent use case of color images (i.e., c=3). Data tion 2.2.2), which makes pixel loss functions suboptimal.
representation (i.e., color space) has played a crucial role in Another observation is that the resultant images tend to be SR methods before DL. Nowadays, most researchers use the blurry: sharp edges need to be modeled better. One way to RGB color space , . Nonetheless, researchers have combat this is by adding uncertainty.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 5 3.1.2 Uncertainty Driven Loss to generate pixelperfect estimations. Instead, it produces images whose features are close to the features of the target.
Modeling uncertainty in DL improves the performance and More formally, let ϕ be a Convolutional Neural Network robustness of deep networks . Therefore, Ning et al.
(CNN) that extracts features like VGG and let ϕl be the proposed an adaptive weighted loss for SISR , which lth feature map. The content loss describes the difference of aims at prioritizing texture and edge pixels that are visually feature maps generated from the HR image ϕl (y) and the more significant than pixels in smooth regions. Thus, the approximation of it, ϕl (yˆ), and is defined as adaptive weighted loss treats every pixel unequally.
Inspired by insights from Variational Autoencoders (cid:13) (cid:13) L (y,yˆ,l) = (cid:13)ϕl (yˆ) − ϕl (y)(cid:13) (25) (VAE) , they first model an estimated uncertainty. Let Content (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 M be the SR model with parameters θ, which learns two The supplementary material provides a visualization intermediate results: µ (x), the mean image, and σ (x), θ θ of this approach. The motivation is to incorporate image the variance image (uncertainty). Consequently, the approxfeatures (content) instead of pixellevel details; a strategy imated image yˆ is given by that has been frequently used for Generative Adversarial yˆ = M(x;θ) = µ (x)+(cid:15) · σ (x), (22) Networks (GAN s), e.g., SRGAN .
θ θ (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) =yˆ =yˆ µ σ 3.2 Generative Adversarial Networks where (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I). Most DL based SISR methods estimate only the mean yˆ . In contrast, Ning et al. proposed estimat- Since the early days of GAN s , they have had a variety of µ ing the uncertainty yˆ simultaneously . applications in CV tasks e.g., in texttoimage synthesis .
σ The core idea is to use two distinct networks: a generator Based on the observation that the uncertainty is sparse G and a discriminator D. The generator network learns to for SISR due to many smooth areas, Ning et al. present an produce samples close to a given dataset and to fool the Estimating Sparse Uncertainty (ESU) loss: discriminator.
L ESU (y,yˆ) = exp(−lnyˆ σ ) · (cid:107)y − yˆ(cid:107) 1 + 2 · lnyˆ σ (23) In the case of SR, the generator is the SR model (G = M).
The discriminator tries to distinguish between samples However, they observed that L lowers the perfor ESU coming from the generator and samples from the actual mance and assumed that L is unsuitable for SISR. They ESU dataset. The interaction between the generator and discrimalso concluded that prioritizing pixels with high uncertainty inator corresponds to a minimax twoplayer game and is is necessary to benefit from uncertainty estimation.
optimized using the adversarial loss , . Given the As a result, they proposed an adaptive weighted loss groundtruth HR image y of the LR image x and the named Uncertainty Driven Loss (UDL) and used a monoapproximated SR image yˆ = G (x), the loss functions tonically increasing function instead of exp(−lnyˆ σ ) in θ G based on Cross Entropy (CE) are: : L UDL (y,yˆ) = [lnyˆ σ − min(lnyˆ σ )] · (cid:107)y − yˆ µ (cid:107) 1 , (24) LC G E = −E x∼P LR (x) log D θ D [G θ G (x)] (26) where [lnyˆ σ − min(lnyˆ σ )] is a nonnegative linear scaling LC D E = − E y∼P HR (y) [log D θ D (y)] (27) function. There are two variables that need to be learned: − E [log(1 − D [G (x)])] x∼P (x) θ θ LR D G yˆ and yˆ . Ning et al. propose to use L to learn µ σ ESU An alternative is to use the Least Square (LS) , , yˆ and then to train a new network with L to learn σ UDL which yields better quality and training stability: yˆ , but with the pretrained yˆ fixed . The idea of µ σ u fr s o i m ng d t e w g o en t e ra ra in tin p g ro i c n e t s o se z s er i o s s t . o W p it r h ev t e h n is t s th et e u v p a , r t i h a e n y ce ac im hi a ev g e e LL G S = E x∼P LR (x) (D θ D [G θ G (x)] − 1) 2 (28) better results than L 1 and L 2 for a wide range of network LLS =E (D [G (x)]) 2 architectures , . D x∼P LR (x) θ D θ G (29) + E (D (y) − 1) 2 However, it requires a twostep training procedure, y∼P HR (y) θ D which adds extra training time. To this day, we have yet Famously known for the GAN research field, but less to find any techniques that circumvent such a twostep explored for SR , is the Wasserstein loss with Gradient training process. The supplementary material contains ad- Penalty (WGANGP) , which is the extended version ditional visualizations. of the Wasserstein loss (WGAN). Despite variations, Lucic et al. have shown that most adversarial losses can reach 3.1.3 Content Loss comparable scores with enough hyperparameter tuning Instead of using the difference between the approximated and random restarts . However, this statement remains and the groundtruth image, one can transform both entities unproven for SR and requires more rigorous confirmation further into a more discriminant domain. Thus, the resul- in the future.
tant loss function utilizes feature maps from an external A recent review by Singla et al. examines GAN s for feature extractor. Such an approach is similar to TBE (see SR in more detail. Generally, SR models perform better if an .2.5). In more detail, the feature extractor is pre- adversarial loss is incorporated. The primary disadvantage trained on another task, i.e., image classification or segmen- is that sufficient training stability is hard to reach due to tation. During the training of the actual SR model on the GAN specific issues like mode collapse . One way to difference of feature maps, the parameters of the feature improve the training stability is to introduce regularization extractor remain fixed. Thus, the goal of the SR model is not terms.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 6 3.2.1 Total Variation Loss One way to regularize GAN s is to use a Total Variation (TV) denoising technique known from image processing. First introduced by Rudin et al. , it filters noise by reducing the TV of a given signal. The TV loss measures the difference of neighboring pixels in the vertical and horizontal direction in one image. It is defined as (cid:118) Fig. 2. Principle of DDPM s. The Gaussian diffusion process adds noise TV(y) = 1 (cid:88) (cid:117) (cid:117)(y − y ) 2 +(y − y ) 2 iteratively.Theiterativerefinementprocessrevertstheprocess.Thetask i+1,j,k i,j,k i,j+1,k i,j,k N (cid:116) of the SR model is to predict the noise added between two iterations.
y (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) i,j,k The predicted noise is then used to revert one iteration.
diff.firstaxis diff.secondaxis (30) and minimizing it results in images with smooth instead of sharp edges. This term helps to stabilize the training of Given γ and y, one can derive y from (cid:15) and vice versa by (cid:101) 0 GAN s , . However, it can hurt the overall image rearranging . Thus, a denoising model ϕ with θ quality since sharp edges are essential. parameters θ has to either predict y or (cid:15).
0 applies the denoising model to predict the noise (cid:15).
3.2.2 Texture Loss The model ϕ θ (x,y (cid:101) ,γ) takes as input the LR image x, the variance of the noise γ, and the noisy target image y and is (cid:101) Texture synthesis with parametric texture models has a long optimized by the following loss function history with the goal of transferring global texture onto (cid:13)   (cid:13)d other images . Due to the advent of DL, Gatys et al.
(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) √ (cid:13) proposed a style transfer method (e.g., painting style) (cid:112) L (x,y ) = E (cid:13)ϕ x, γ · y + 1 − γ · (cid:15),γ − (cid:15)(cid:13) , that utilized a pretrained neural network ϕ. Based on that, 0 (cid:15),γ (cid:13) θ  0  (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) Enhance Net used the texture loss to enforce textural =y (cid:101)by d (35) similarity. It uses the Gram Matrix to capture correlations of where d ∈ {1,2}. The alternative regression target y different channels between feature maps: 0 remains open for future research.
(cid:88) Gl (y) = ϕl (y) · ϕl (y) (31) The refinement process p is the reverse direction of (c ,c ) (i,j,c ) (i,j,c ) 1 2 1 2 (i,j,.)∈Ω y the diffusion process. Given the prediction of (cid:15) t by ϕ θ , can be reformulated to approximate y : 0 where ϕl is the lth feature map. The texture loss is √ (cid:112) y = γ · yˆ + 1 − γ · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) t t 0 t θ t t (cid:13) (cid:13)2 L (y,yˆ,l) = (cid:13)Gl (yˆ) − Gl (y)(cid:13) (32) 1 (cid:16) (cid:112) (cid:17) (36) TEX (cid:13) (cid:13) ⇐⇒ yˆ = √ · y − 1 − γ · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) 2 0 t t θ t t γ t Substituting yˆ into the posterior distribution to parameter 3.3 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic ize the mean of p (y |y ,x), details shown in supplemenθ t−1 t Interestingly, DL methods are well suited for denoising tary material, yields Gaussian noise. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (cid:20) (cid:21) 1 1 − α (DDPM s) exploit this insight by formulating a Markov µ (x,y ,γ ) = √ y − √ t · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) (37) θ t t t θ t t α 1 − γ chain to alter one image into a noise distribution gradually, t t and the other way around. The idea of this approach is that The authors of set the variance of p (y |y ,x) to θ t−1 t estimating small perturbations is more tractable for neural (1 − α ) for the sake of simplicity. As a result, each refinet networks than explicitly describing the whole distribution ment step with (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I) is realized as t with a single, nonanalyticallynormalizable function.
1 (cid:20) 1 − α (cid:21) √ First in SR was “Super Resolution via Repeated Refine- y ← √ y − √ t · ϕ (x,y ,γ ) + 1 − α · (cid:15) t−1 t θ t t t t α 1 − γ ment” () . It adds noise to the LR image until y ∼ t t T (38) N (0,I) and generates a target HR image y iteratively in T 0 And indeed, generates sharp images with more refinement steps. While adding noise is straightforward, it details than its regressionbased counterparts on natural uses a DL based model that transforms a standard normal and face images. The authors also strengthened the results distribution into an empirical data distribution by reverting by positively testing the generated images with 50 human the noiseadding process as shown in .
subjects. Thus, the outcome of is a promising direction The diffusion process q adds Gaussian noise to a LR for future investigations. Nevertheless, seems prone to image y = y over T iterations with 0 bias, e.g., applied to a facial dataset; the images result in √ q (y |y ) = N (y | γ · y ,(1 − γ ) · I), (33) too smooth skin texture by dropping moles, pimples, and t 0 t t 0 t piercings. More extensive ablation studies could help in (cid:81)T where γ = α and 0 < α < 1 are hyperparameters t i=1 i t establishing the practicality for realworld SR applications.
to determine the variance of added noise per iteration.
Consequently, the noisy image y can be expressed as (cid:101) 4 UPSAMPLING √ (cid:112) y = γ · y + 1 − γ · (cid:15), (cid:15) ∼ N (0,I) (34) A critical aspect is how to increase the spatial size of a given (cid:101) 0 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) feature map. This section gives an overview of upsampling mean variance IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 7 methods, either interpolationbased (nearestneighbor, bilin- in the channel dimension, which can be more efficient for ear, and bicubic interpolation) or learningbased (transposed smaller kernel sizes than transposed convolution. However, convolution, subpixel layer, and metaupscale). Various assume zero values are used instead of nearestneighbor visualizations can be found in the supplementary material. interpolation in the transposed convolution. In that case, a transposed convolution can be simplified to a subpixel layer . Given a scaling factor s and input channel size 4.1 Interpolationbased Upsampling c, it produces a feature map with s 2 · c channels. Next, a Many DL based SR models use image interpolation methconvolution operation with zero padding is applied, such ods because of their simplicity. The most known methods that the spatial size of the input and the resulting feature are nearestneighbor, bilinear, and bicubic interpolation.
map remains the same. Finally, it reshapes the feature map Nearestneighbor interpolation is the most straightforto produce a spatially upsampled output. The receptive field ward algorithm because the interpolated value is based on of the convolutional layer can be arbitrary but is often 1×1 its nearest pixel values. Nearestneighbor is swift since no or 3 × 3. This procedure is widely known in the literature calculations are needed, which is why it is favorable for SR as pixel shuffle layer , , . In practice, the submodels . However, there are no interpolated transitions, pixel layer produces repeating artifacts that can be difficult which results in blocky artifacts.
to unlearn for deeper layers, which is also further explained In contrast, bilinear interpolation bypasses blocky artiin the supplementary material.
facts by producing smoother transitions with linear interpolation on both axes. It needs a receptive field of 2×2, making 4.2.3 Decomposed Upsampling it relatively fast and easily applicable .
An extension to the above approaches is decomposed trans However, SR methods typically do not use it because posed convolution . D convolutions instead of bicubic interpolation delivers much smoother results. But it 2 D convolutions reduces the number of operations and demands much more computation time due to a receptive parameters for the component k 2 to 2 · k. Note that the apfield size of 4×4 and makes it the slowest approach among plied decomposition is not exclusively bound to transposed all three methods. Nonetheless, it is generally used by SR convolution and can also be used in subpixel layers.
models if an interpolationbased upsampling is applied , , since the overall time consumption is unessential 4.2.4 Attentionbased Upsampling for GPU based models, which are common in SR research.
Another alternative to transposed convolution is attentionbased upsampling . It follows the definition of attention 4.2 Learningbased Upsampling based convolution (or scaled dot product attention) and Learningbased upsampling introduces modules that up- replaces the 1 x 1 convolutions with upsampling methods. In sample a given feature map within a learnable setup. more detail, it replaces the convolution for the query matrix The most standard learningbased upsampling methods are with bilinear interpolation and the convolution for the key the transposed convolution and subpixel layer. Promising and value matrix with zeropadding upsampling similar alternatives are metaupscaling, decomposed upsampling, to transposed convolution. It needs fewer parameters than attentionbased upsampling, and upsampling via Look Up transposed convolution but a slightly higher number of Tables, which are the last discussed methods in this section. operations. Also, it trains considerably slower: a shared issue across attention mechanisms.
4.2.1 Transposed .2.5 Upsampling with Look Up Tables Transposed convolution expands the spatial size of a given feature map and subsequently applies a convolution oper- A recently proposed alternative is to use a Look Up Table ation. In general, the expansion is realized by adding zeros (LUT) to upsample . Before generating the LUT, a smallbetween given values. However, some approaches differ scale SR model is trained to upscale small patches of a by first applying nearestneighbor interpolation and then LR image to target HR patches. Subsequently, the LUT is applying zeropadding, e.g., FSRCNN . The receptive created by saving the results of the trained SR model applied field of the transposed convolution layer can be arbitrary on a uniformly distributed input space. It reduces the up- (often set to 3 × 3). The added values depend on the kernel sampling runtime to the time necessary for memory access size of the subsequent convolution operation. This proce- while achieving better quality than bicubic interpolation. On dure is widely known in literature and is also called de- the other hand, it requires additional training to create the convolution layer, although it does not apply deconvolution LUT. Also, the size of the small patches is crucial since the , , . In practice, transposed convolution layers size of the LUT increases exponentially. However, it is an tend to produce crosshatch artifacts due to zeropadding exciting approach that is worth further exploration.
(further discussed in the supplementary material). Also, the upsampled feature values are fixed and redundant. The sub- 4.2.6 Flexible Upsampling pixel layer was proposed to circumvent this problem.
Most existing SR methods only consider fixed, integer scale factors s ∈ N . However, most realworld scenarios require 4.2.2 Sub Pixel Layer flexible zooming, which demands SR methods that can Introduced with ESPCN , it uses a convolution layer be applied with arbitrary scale factors s ∈ R+ . It raises to extract a deep feature map and rearranges it to return a significant problem for models that use those learningan upsampled output. Thus, the expansion is carried out based upsampling methods: one has to train and save IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 8 various models for different scales, which limits the use of such methods for realworld scenarios , . In order to overcome this limitation, a metaupscale module was proposed . It predicts a set of filters for each position in a feature map that is later applied to a location in a lowerresolution feature map. A visualization of the upscale module and the aforementioned steps can be found in the supplementary material. This approach is exciting for tasks that require arbitrary magnification levels, e.g., zooming.
Nevertheless, its downsides unfold if huge scaling factors are required because it has to predict the filter weights W (i,j) independently for each position. There are only a Fig. 4. Spatialattention mechanism . It extracts informations by few works that involve this approach in the literature.
inspecting the relationship between two positions (first matrix multipli Besides existing SR methods, one can treat each image as cation) and returns the importance of each position as a feature map a continuous function and generate patches at a fixed pixel (second matrix multiplication). MM denotes the matrix multiplication.
resolution around a center like Any Res GAN , which could be an interesting path to follow for future SR research. The principle is shown in . Intuitively, the resulting feature map contains each position’s weighted sum of features. It captures spatially separated information by a 5 ATTENTION MECHANISMS FOR SR long range in the feature map. In SR, the Residual Nonlocal Attention revolutionized Natural Language Processing Attention Network (RNAN) was the first architecture (NLP) and plays an essential role for DL in several appliusing nonlocal spatial attention to improve performance.
cations . This section presents how SR methods employ A known architecture is Swin IR , which reaches attention. There are two categories: Channel and spatial stateoftheart performance and follows the idea of transattention, which can be applied simultaneously.
formers (i.e., multihead selfattention ) more strictly by applying a sequence of multiple swin transformer layers.
5.1 Channel Attention Swin FIR develops this idea further with fast fourier Feature maps generated by CNN s are not equally important. convolutions. Since transformers originate from NLP, their Therefore, essential channels should be weighted higher natural application is restricted to a sequence of patches, than counterpart channels, which is the goal of channel and therefore, it requires a patchwise formulation of an imattention. It focuses on “which” (channels) carry crucial de- age. This is a significant drawback of transformers applied tails. Hu et al. introduced the channelattention mecha- to SR. Swin IR diminishes the problem by shifting between nism for CV as an addon module for any CNN architecture. attention blocks to transfer knowledge between patches.
of its simple addon installation, it is still in use for current Bottleneck tricks and patchwise applications are used to research . One interesting future direction of channel- circumvent this problem but are also suboptimal for imporattention would be to combine it with pruning in order to tance weighting. Future research should further optimize not only amplify quality but also to save computation time. computation speed without forfeiting global information.
5.2 Spatial .3 Mixed Attention In contrast to channel attention, spatial attention focuses Since both attention types can be applied easily, merging on “where” the input feature maps carry important details, them into one framework is natural. Thus, the model focuses which requires extracting global information from the input.
on “which” (channel) is essential and “where” (spatially) Therefore, Wang et al. proposed nonlocal attention, to extract the most valuable features. This combines the similar to selfattention for NLP, following the idea of benefits of both approaches and introduces an exciting field Query Key Valueparadigm known from transformers .
of research, especially in SR , . One potential future direction would be to introduce attention mechanisms incorporating both concerns in one module.
A wellknown architecture for mixed attention is the Holistic Attention Network (HAN) , which uses hierarchical features (from residual blocks) and obtains dependencies between features of different depths while allocating Fig. 3. Channelattention mechanism . It reduces a feature map in attention weights to them. Thus, it weighs the importance the spatial dimensions and extracts weighting values by using several of depth layers in the residual blocks instead of spatial loca FC layers that are elementwise multiplied to the initial feature map.
tions within one feature map. Finally, the network uses the IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 9 layer attention weighted feature map and combines it via 6.5 Multi Task Learning addition with channel attention before the final prediction.
Multitask learning is an exciting research area for SR with the core idea to train a given model to perform various tasks 6 ADDITIONAL LEARNING STRATEGIES , . E.g., one can assign a label to each image and use multiple datasets for training. Next, a SR model can Additional learning strategies are blueprints that can be learn to reconstruct the SR image and predict its category used in addition to regular training. This section presents (e.g., natural or manga image) . Another idea is to use the most common methods used in SR, which can imdatasets that have access to salient image boundaries or mensely impact an SR model’s overall performance.
image segmentation and use features extracted from the model to predict these . Research on selflearning is an 6.1 Curriculum Learning interesting starting point to combine ideas with SR.
Curriculum learning follows the idea of training a model under easy conditions and gradually involving more com 6.6 Normalization Techniques plexity , i.e., additional scaling sizes. For instance, a model trains with a scale of two and gradually higher A slight change in the input distribution is a cause of many scaling factors, e.g., Pro SR . ADRSR concatenates issues because layers need to continuously adapt to new all previously computed HR outputs. CARN updates distributions, which is known as covariate shift and can the HR image in sequential order, where additional layers be alleviated with Batch Norm . While Batch Norm helps extend the network for four times upsampling, which uses in tasks like image classification, it is frequently used for previously learned layers, but ignores previously computed SR , , . However, Batch Norm does not apply HR images . Another way of using curriculum learning well in SR because it removes network range flexibility by is gradually increasing the noise in LR images, e.g., in normalizing features . The performance of a SR model SRFBN . Curriculum learning can shorten the training can be increased substantially without Batch Norm .
time by reducing the difficulty of large scaling factors. Recently, the authors of Adaptive Deviation Modulator (Ada DM) studied this phenomenon and were able 6.2 Enhanced Predictions to show that the standard deviation of residual features shrinks a lot after normalization layers (including Batch Instead of enhancing simple inputoutput pairs, one can use Norm, layer, instance, and group normalization), which data augmentation techniques like rotation and flipping for causes the performance degradation in SR. The standard final prediction. More specifically, create a set of images via deviation resembles the amount of variation of pixel values, data augmentation of one image, e.g., rotation. Next, let the which primarily affects edges in images. They proposed a SR model reconstruct images of the set. Finally, inverse the module within a feature extraction block to address this data augmentation via transformations and derive a final problem and amplify the pixel deviation of normalized prediction, i.e., the mean , or the median .
features. It calculates a modulated output y by (cid:101) 6.3 Learned Degradation y = y · eϕ[log(σ[x])], (39) (cid:101) So far, this work assumed learning processes from LR to where x is the residually propagated input, σ [x] its stan HR. The Content Adaptive Resampler (CAR) introduced dard deviation along all three axes, and ϕ a learnable feature a resampler for downscaling. It predicts kernels to produce extraction module. The logarithmic scaling guarantees stadownscaled images according to its HR input. Next, a SR ble training. As a result, it is possible to apply normalization model takes the LR image and predicts the SR image.
layers to stateoftheart SR models and to achieve sub Thus, it simultaneously learns the degradationmapping and stantial performance improvements. One limitation is the upsampling task. The authors demonstrate that the CAR additional GPU memory during training, roughly two times framework trained jointly with SR networks improves statethe size. Therefore, lightweight normalization techniques oftheart SR performance furthermore.
similar to Ada DM, but with less GPU memory consumption are of high interest for future research.
6.4 Network Fusion Another way of improving performance is to apply multiple SR models. Network fusion uses the output of all additional 7 SR MODELS SR models and applies a fusion layer to the outputs. Finally, This section presents the most technical part: How to conit predicts the SR image used for the learning objective. For struct an SR model? In the beginning, we introduce different instance, the Contextwise Network Fusion (CNF) uses frameworks that all architectures need to apply, which is this approach with SRCNN, a small SR model introduced in the location of the upsampling itself. After that, it chronothe next chapter. This method adds a considerable amount logically examines different architecture types. Additional of computation and memory, depending on the complexity visualizations can be found in the supplementary material of the SR models. However, it achieves a performance and an overview benchmark in .
boost and is recommended if computational resources are sufficiently available. A potential future direction would 7.1 Upsampling Location be to use network fusion to determine critical computation paths and to merge multiple networks into one by pruning Besides the choice of the upsampling method, one crucial or dropout mechanisms. decision in designing SR models is where to place the IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEINTELLIGENCE,VOL.0,NO.0,2023 10 Fig. 5. Visualization of different upsampling locations within a neural network: (upper left) postupsampling, (bottom left) preupsampling, (upper right) progressive upsampling, and (bottom right) iterative upanddown up