LANGUAGEAGNOSTIC MULTILINGUAL MODELING Arindrima Datta, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Jesse Emond, Anjuli Kannan, Brian Roark {arindrimadatta, bhuv, emond, anjuli, roark}@google.com Google Inc, NYC, USA ABSTRACT word should be assigned. The problem is compounded by inconsistent transcriptions and text normalization .
Multilingual Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) systems allow for the joint training of datarich and datascarce languages in a single model. This enables data and parameter sharing across The Indic languages considered in this study overlap in acouslanguages, which is especially beneficial for the datascarce lantic and lexical content, due to either language family relations or guages. However, most stateoftheart multilingual models require the geographic and cultural proximity of the native speakers. Howthe encoding of language information and therefore are not as ever, their writing systems occupy different unicode blocks. This flexible or scalable when expanding to newer languages. Languagecauses inconsistency in transcriptions: a common word, wordpiece independent multilingual models help to address this issue, and are or phoneme can be realized with multiple variants in the nativealso better suited for multicultural societies where several languages language writing systems, leading to increased confusions and inare frequently used together (but often rendered with different writefficiency in data sharing when training a multilingual model. We ing systems). In this paper, we propose a new approach to building propose a training strategy that maps all languages to one writing a languageagnostic multilingual ASR system which transforms all system through a manytoone transliteration transducer. We show languages to one writing system through a manytoone transliterwith Indic languages, that such a multilingual, endtoend ASR sysation transducer. Thus, similar sounding acoustics are mapped to a tem can outperform a multilingual ASR system conditioned on the single, canonical target sequence of graphemes, effectively separatlanguage, particularly for the datascarce languages.
ing the modeling and rendering problems. We show with four Indic languages, namely, Hindi, Bengali, Tamil and Kannada, that the languageagnostic multilingual model achieves up to 10% relative Balancing skewed distributions of data across languages, arisreduction in Word Error Rate (WER) over a languagedependent ing from variability in the number of native speakers of a language multilingual model. plays a key role in the performance of multilingual models. To address this, approaches that represent the world’s languages as points Index Terms— speech recognition, languageindependent, in a language space , to enable efficient bootstrapping, sharing multilingual, transliteration, RNNT of parameters (particularly for Indic languages) and adaptation of speech recognition systems to any language, have been proposed.
1. INTRODUCTION Techniques originally proposed for adaptation of models to speakers, domains and languages have also been successfully extended Multilingual automated speech recognition (ASR) models have to address the difficulties of data imbalance in multilingual models been studied extensively, spanning both hybrid Hidden Markov .
Models/Neural Networks and more recently, Endto End (E 2 E) models . All these models have one principle in common: theysharedataandparametersfromallthelanguagesthey In this work, we propose a strategy to balance the data effecare trained on, allowing for robustness and better generalization. In tively, making it suitable for languageagnostic multilingual traindoingso, amultilingual ASR systemthatistrainedasasinglemodel ing. We present a single, multilingual ASR model that is languagefor all languages can benefit the datascarce/lowresource languages independent, yet achieves the same stateoftheart performance as by transferring the shared knowledge to them.
a model conditioned on the language information. It also addresses Prior work in training multilingual representations and the challenges of codeswitching, making it readily useful for realendtoendmodels havedemonstratedthatthebestperformworld scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work ing models require conditioning on language information. This inthat demonstrates stateoftheart performance with a multilingual formation can be used to track language switches within an utter ASR system that uses a simple, data normalization scheme to elimiance , adjust language sampling ratios, or add additional panate the need for languagedependence.
rameters based on the data distribution . However, dependency on language information limits the ability of a multilingual model to be extended to newer languages. For Indic languages, there are ad- Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. Wepresentourproditional challenges from codeswitching in conversation: there is a posed method in , followed by a description of our model considerable amount of variability in the usage of a second language architecturein ,andresultsin . Adetailedanalysis (typically English) alongside native languages such as Tamil, Ben- of our results compared to schemes that use languageconditioning gali or Hindi. This makes it challenging to model the context under is presented in .3 and key insights are highlighted in Secwhich code switching occurs, and the language to which a spoken tion 5.
0202 rp A 02 ]SA.ssee[ 1 v 17590.4002:vi Xra (cid:27)(cid:35)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:105) (cid:116) (cid:82) (cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:109)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77) 2. MULTILINGUAL DATA PROCESSING: PROPOSED (cid:34)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:66) (cid:62)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:47)(cid:66) (cid:69)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:28) (cid:104)(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:66)(cid:72) METHOD িডসকভাির (cid:707)ड(cid:557)कवरी (cid:215)ಸ(cid:95)ವ(cid:229) (cid:114)(cid:98)கவரி (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:66) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:70)(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:66) 2.1. Script normalization using transliteration (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:70)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:66) Transliteration is a sequencetosequence mapping problem that (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:70)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:118) aims to convert text from one writing system to another. Since (cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:70)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:66) transliterating texts from Indic languages’ native scripts to the target script of Latin has been effective in , we chose Latin as the . Attested romanizations of the English word “discovery” in common script to normalize all the training data.
each of the four languages, illustrating the variation that can occur Following , we make use of pair language models for in transliteration training data.
transliteration. Also known as joint multigram models, these were first proposed in for graphemetophoneme conversion. These are ngram models over “pair” symbols consisting of an input unihowevertheannotatorsineachlanguagemayvaryinthenumberand code codepoint paired with an output unicode codepoint, e.g., x:Y.
kind of romanizations they suggest, which may be driven by many As with graphemetophoneme conversion, given an input lexicon factors, including differences in pronunciation or simply individual consisting of native script words and Latin script realizations of variation.
those words (known as romanizations), expectation maximization Thevariabilityofthetrainingdataintheselanguagescanleadto is used to derive pairwise alignments between symbols in both the aninconsistencyinthemappingofsharedvocabularytoasimilarronative and Latin scripts.1 These symbolaligned sequences are then manization. Whenamultilingual ASR modelistrainedwithtranslitused to train an ngram model, in our case a 6 gram model. An erated data, spelling inconsistency across languages creates a source ngram model over pair symbol sequences is a joint model over the of confusion and reduces the intended sharing of knowledge across input/output sequences, which can thus be used to transliterate in eithe languages. Ideally, we would like English words, for example, ther direction. The ngram models are straightforwardly represented to be mapped onto the same Latin script transcription of the word as weighted finite state transducers (WFST s), either as an acceptor regardless of the native script in which they are originally written.
over pair sequences, or as a transducer, after separating the pair To mitigate such data inconsistencies, we propose two approaches symbols into input and output symbols in the transducer. Inverting for preprocessing the data for transliteration WFST training.
the WFST swaps the input and output labels, so that the same joint model can be used to map from the Latin script to the specific native 2.3.1. Agreementbased (AB) Data Preprocessing script or the other way around, providing the means for transliterating in either direction. Further details on such methods can be found In this method, we preprocess only the transliteration pairs which in .
have at least one common transliterated form in all the four languages. Native words that do not share a transliterated form are 2.2. Effect of script normalization left unprocessed. As an example, the transliterated forms of the native words in would only consist of discovery after pre To understand the extent to which these languages overlap, we stud- processing.
ied phonemegrapheme maps and words shared across these languages. Both these factors would impact the performance of a mul Agreementbased preprocessing tilingual model by allowing for the grapheme from the wrong lan Hi Words: Mappingfromnative Hindiwordsto Latintransliteratedforms; guage to be output when the model is not conditioned on language Bn Words: Mappingfromnative Bengaliwordsto Latintransliteratedforms; information. For example, the graphemes , , , in Hindi, Ta Words: Mappingfromnative Tamilwordsto Latintransliteratedforms; Bengali, Tamil and Kannada map to the same phonetic sound, aa. Kn Words: Mappingfromnative Kannadawordsto Latintransliteratedforms; This implies that the multilingual model could hypothesize all four common latin ←Latin(Hi Words)∩Latin(Bn Words)∩Latin(Ta Words) graphemes with different likelihoods if it were not conditioned on ∩Latin(Kn Words) any language information. If all these graphemes were mapped to forallmappingin{Hi Words,Bn Words,Ta Words,Kn Words}do one canonical writing system, Latin, it would allow the model to forallnative wordin Native(mapping)do share parameters for aa. illustrates the various possible ro- agreed latin ←mapping[native word]∩common latin ifagreed latin (cid:54)= ∅then manizations of overlapping words in the training data, making the mapping[native word]← agreed latin task of script normalization difficult. endif endfor endfor 2.3. Proposed Transliteration Transducer Asstatedin .1,theinputtotrainingthepairlanguagemodel transducersisalexiconconsistingofnativescriptwordsandpossible 2.3.2. Frequencybased (FB) Data Preprocessing Latin script romanizations. Importantly, there is no standard orthog In addition to the nativetransliterated word pairs, the training data raphy in the Latin script in these languages, so that words can be also contained the frequency of occurrences of all transliterated spelled in a variety of ways. shows native script spellings of forms for a native word. Utilizing the frequencies in this prethe English word “discovery” in each of the four languages, along processing method we transformed ALL transliteration pairs for with attested romanizations of that word in the training data. In all each language. This approach is also based on our empirical obserfour languages, the actual spelling of the word in English is attested, vation that the most frequent transliterated forms were usually the 1 Traininglexiconsforalllanguagesinvestigatedwereannotatedbynative best, for instance, the commonly used spellings of proper nouns, speakers. See forfurtherdetailsonhowtheywerecollected. or the dictionary spellings of the English words. Thus, for a native word, we retain only the transliterated forms that meet a frequency Latin grapheme targets (all languages are transliterated to the latin threshold (in this case, the average transliteration frequency per writing system). Each of the single language models was trained native word) and discard the rest. with a combined set of graphemes covering both, Latin and native writing systems.
Frequencybased preprocessing All models were trained in Lingvo on 4 × 4 Tensor Pro Mappings: Foreachlanguage,mappingfromnativewordstotransliteratedforms cessing Units slices with a batch size of 4,096. The metric we report is transliterationoptimized WER . Following , we forallmappingin Mappingsdo also explored the use of a timereduction layer with reduction factor forallnative wordin Native(mapping)do translits ←mapping[word] N=2 after the second encoder layer of the RNNT model in order to avg freq ← 1 (cid:80) (t) |translits| t∈tran Freq speedup training and inference.
mapping[native word]← {t|t ∈ translits,Freq(t) ≥ avg,freq} endfor endfor 4. EXPERIMENTS, RESULTS, AND .1. .4. Data Balancing The training and test data for the four Indic languages consist Due to the varying distribution of language speakers and maturity of anonymized, humantranscribed utterances representative of of speech products, our training data is steeply skewed across lan Google’s voice search traffic described in . Of the four guages. In our setup, the highestresource language (Hindi) has two languages, Hindi, Bengali, Tamil and Kannada, Hindi has the most orders of magnitude more data than the lowestresource language, amount of training data and Kannada (further reduced by a factor of Kannada. Anyneuralnetworktrainedonsuchimbalanceddatatends six from what is described in ) has nearly two orders of magtobemoreinfluencedbytheoverrepresentedlanguagesinthetrainnitude less training data than Hindi, with Tamil and Bengali falling ing set . The effect is even more pronounced for endtoend in between. The training data is augmented with additional copies model architectures that neither have language information encoded from noisy utterances created by corrupting the utterances using a with the acoustic features, nor incorporate language models. Thus, room simulator and noise styles .
in a languageagnostic multilingual system, where the model is not aided with a language identifier, it is even more critical to address data imbalance.
4.2. Results Webalancedthetrainingsetacrosslanguagesbyaugmentingthe originaldatawithdiversenoisestyles . Theexactamountofdata In this Section, we describe the results from transilteration transducaugmentation needed for each language is determined empirically, erstrainedwiththemethodsproposedin .3. Wepresenttwo by oberserving that the singlelanguage recognizer for the lowest- setsofresults. Unlessotherwisenoted,all Word Error Rates(WER s) resource language, Kannada degrades in performance when trained aretransliterationoptimized WER sintroducedin . First,wevalon more than 75 noisy copies of the original data. The remaining idate our approach by evaluating these transducers for transliterated languages were augmented with the needed number of noise styles scoring only. presents these results with the single lantoresultinequalamountsofdataforeachofthefourlanguagesused guage models. The ASR baseline for all languages, presented as S 0 in the multilingual models. in uses the transliteration transducer described in . Both proposed methods, Agreement Based and Frequency Based data preprocessing provide WER reductions over the baseline ASR model, 3. MULTILINGUAL MODEL (rows S 1 and S 2 in ). The improvements from the two data A lowlatency, endtoend, Recurrent Neural Network Transducers preprocessing methods are similar except for Hindi. The training (RNNT) architecture, originally proposed in is used for all data for Hindi contains several valid romanizations occurring with the models in this paper. The RNNT models used here are simi- similar frequencies, and Frequency Based preprocessing eliminated lar to the ones used in and are suitable for interactive ap- some of these. We hypothesize that this resulted in transliteration plications that require streaming ASR. To summarize, the architec- errors when rendering ASR hypotheses in the native writing systure consists of the following: an encoder of stacked LSTM layers tem. The frequency distributions of romanizations for the other lanthat transforms a sequence of ddimensional feature vectors x = guages are more skewed with many transliterated forms occurring (x ,x ,··· ,x ), where x ∈ Rd, at each time step to a higher- with low frequencies (). Therefore, these other languages 1 2 T t order feature representation, denoted by henc,··· ,henc; an LSTM- benefit from this average frequency based pruning of rare and poten 1 T based decoder that processes the sequence of nonblank, hypoth- tiallyerroneousromanizations. Ontheotherhand, Agreement Based esized graphemes, y ,...,y into a representation hdec; and a data preprocessing selects transliteration variants that are common 0 u i−1 u i joint network that combines these to predict a distribution over the across languages, and affects only words with at least one such comnext output grapheme, P(y |x ,··· ,x ,y ,...,y ). The in- mon transliteration from all the languages; typically proper nouns or i 1 t 0 u i i−1 put features are 80 dimensional logmel features, computed over a borrowed English words. Therefore, this results in consistent tran 25 ms window and shifted every 10 ms, which are further stacked silteration and rendering in the native writing systems.
with 7 frames to the left and downsampled to 30 ms frame rate. The Next, having established the validity of the proposed method, RNNT model comprises of eight 2,048 dimensional LSTM layers we study the impact on multilingual models both in transliteration in the encoder, and two 2,048 dimensional LSTM layers in the pre- of training data and in transliterated scoring. A similar trend in diction network, each of which is followed by a 640 dimensional WER reductions is seen in . Here, we observe that for Hindi, projectionlayer. The jointnetworkis composedof 640 hiddenunits. the performance gap between the Agreement Based and Frequency The languagedependent (LD) multilingual system has 454 unified- Based data preprocessing methods is further reduced. This can be grapheme targets while the languageagnostic (LA) system has 44 attributedtothefactthatanincreasednumberofvalidromanizations Exp Model Hi Bn Ta Kn Avg LA .65 S 0 .0 20.4 28.8 50.2 29.6 0.65 S 1 S 0 + .9 19.6 26.7 49.4 28.6 0.55 0.55 S 2 S 0 + .3 19.6 26.9 49.4 28.8 W W W 0.45 E E 0.45 E . Effect of the proposed Agreementbased (AB) and R R R 0.35 0.35 Frequencybased (FB) data processing approaches on Word Error Rate of singlelanguage models.
TRAINING STEPS TRAINING STEPS Exp Model Hi Bn Ta Kn Avg Kn = 0.54, Ta = 0.45, Bn =0.40, Hi = 0.38, Kn = 0.54, Ta = 0.43, Bn =0.45, Hi = 0.43, Avg = 0.45 (131 k steps) Avg = 0.46 (122 k steps) M 0 .8 24.2 30.5 36.7 28.6 M 1 M 0 + .9 22.4 26.8 32.6 26.2 Fig. 1. Untransliterated Word Error Rate plots comparing language M 2 M 0 + .9 22.2 27.6 33.1 26.4 agnostic [left] , and languagedependent [right] multilingual models on held out development test sets for all languages. WER s at con . Effect of the proposed Agreementbased (AB) and vergence are noted below each plot for all languages.
Frequencybased (FB) data processing approaches on Word Error Rate of multilingual models.
Exp Model Hi Bn Ta Kn Avg languagedependent and languageagnostic multilingual models on S 1 S 0 + .9 19.6 26.7 49.4 28.6 a heldout development set. We used average WER computed on S 3 S 1 – .5 17.4 25.0 44.9 26.4 the development test set over all languages as the metric to decide M 1 M 0 + .9 22.4 26.8 32.6 26.2 the point of convergence. We observed that at approximately 130 K M 3 M 1 – .6 20.8 25.6 30.5 24.6 steps, both the LD and LA models begin to overfit on the datascarce language, Kannada (depicted by the magenta curve in the . Performance (WER) of Singlelanguage and Multlingual figure) while continuing to improve in performance over the other models with and without timereduction (TR) layers.
languages. This suggests that the models still had not converged for the datarich languages, i.e, had not been trained on significant por Exp Model Hi Bn Ta Kn Avg tions of the datarich languages. However, the LA model yielded a LD .7 23.1 27.1 33.1 26.2 much lower WER on the datarich language, Hindi (depicted by the LA Languageagnostic (M 3) 21.6 20.8 25.6 30.5 24.6 blue curve in the figure) without degrading the performance on the other languages, suggesting better data and parameter sharing.
In multilingual models, languages compete for capacity given Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank Parisa the limited model size, training strategy and stopping criterion. Fig- Haghani, Neeraj Gaur, Eugene Weinstein, Pedro Moreno and ure 1 illustrates the convergence and performance properties of the Meysam Bastani for helpful discussions and support.
6. REFERENCES A. Ragni, M.J.F. Gales, and K.M. Knill, “A language space representation for speech recognition,” in ICASSP, 2015.
Christian Fugen, Sebastian Stuker, Hagen Soltau, Florian P. Swietojanski and S. Renals, “Learning hidden unit contri Metze, and Tanja Schultz, “Efficient handling of multilingual butions for unsupervised speaker adaptation of neural network language models,” in ASRU, 2003.
acoustic models,” SLT, 2014.
S. Thomas, S. Ganapathy, and H. Hermansky, “Multilingual S. Tong, P.N. Garner, and H. Bourlard, “Multilingual training mlp features for low resource LVCSR systems,” in ICASSP, and crosslingual adaptation on CTC based acoustic model,” 2012.
Preprint arXiv:1711.10025, 2017.
Z. Tuske, J. Pinto, D. Willett, and R. Schluter, “Investigation ˇ M. Karafia´t, F. Gre´zl, M. Hannemann, and J.H. Cernocky`, oncrossandmultilingualmlpfeaturesundermatchedandmis- “BUT neural network features for spontaneous Vietnamese in matched acoustical conditions,” in ICASSP, 2013.
BABEL,” in ICASSP, 2014.
T. Sercu, G. Saon, J. Cui, B. Ramabhadran, B. Kingsbury, and L. Hellsten, B. Roark, P. Goyal, C. Allauzen, F. Beaufays, A. Sethy, “Network architectures for multilingual speech rep T. Ouyang, M. Riley, and D. Rybach, “Transliterated moresentation learning,” in ICASSP, 2017.
bile keyboard input via weighted finitestate transducers,” in J. Cui, B. Kingsbury, B. Ramabhadran, and et al, “Knowledge FSMNLP, 2017, pp. 10–19.
distillation across ensembles of multilingual models for low- M. Bisani and H. Ney, “Jointsequence models for graphemeresource languages,” in ASRU, 2017.
tophoneme conversion,” Speech communication, vol. 50, no.
S. Watanabe, T. Hori, and J. Hershey, “Language indepen- 5, pp. 434–451, 2008.
dent endtoend architecture for joint language identification C. Kim, A. Misra, K. Chin, T. Hughes, A. Narayanan, T. N.
and speech recognition,” in ASRU, 2017.
Sainath, and M. Bacchiani, “Generated of largescale simu- M. Karafit, M. Baskar, S. Watanabe, T. Hori, and M. Wiesner, lated utterances in virtual rooms to train deepneural networks “Analysis of multilingual sequencetosequence speech recog- for farfield speech recognition in Google Home,” in Proc. Innition systems,” in arXiv:1811.03451, 2018. terspeech, 2017.
A. Rosenberg, K. Audhkhasi, A. Sethy, B. Ramabhadran, and A. Graves, “Sequence transduction with recurrent neural net M. Picheny, “Endtoend speech recognition and keyword works,” in ICASSP, 2012.
search on lowresource languages,” in ICASSP, 2017.
Y. He, T.N. Sainath, R. Prabhavalkar, I. Mc Graw, R. Alvarez, B. Ma, C. Guan, H. Li, and C.-H. Lee, “Multilingual speech D. Zhao, D. Rybach, A. Kannan, Y. Wu, R. Pang, et al., recognition with language identification,” in ICSLP, 2002. “Streamingendtoendspeechrecognitionformobiledevices,” in ICASSP, 2019.
A.Cutler,Y.Zhang,E.Chuangsuwanich,and J.R.Glass, “Language ID basedtrainingofmultilingualstackedbottleneckfea- J. Shen, P. Nguyen, Y. Wu, Z. Chen, et al., “Lingvo: a modular tures,” in Interspeech, 2014. and scalable framework for sequencetosequence modeling,” in arXiv:1902.08295, 2019.
S. Watanabe, T. Hori, and J.R. Hershey, “Language independent endtoend architecture for joint language identification N. Jouppi, C. Young, and N. Patil, “Indatacenter performance and speech recognition,” in ASRU, 2017. analysisofatensorprocessingunit,” in Co RR abs/1704.04760, 2017.
A. Kannan, A. Datta, T.N. Sainath, E. Weinstein, B. Ramabhadran, Y. Wu, A. Bapna, Z. Chen, and S. Lee, “Largescale J. Emond, B. Ramabhadran, B. Roark, P. Moreno, and M. Ma, multilingual speech recognition with a streaming endtoend “Transliteration based approaches to improve codeswitched model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05330, 2019. speech recognition performance,” in SLT, 2018.
H. Seki, S. Watanabe, T. Hori, J. Le Roux, and J.R. Her- Arindrima Datta and Anjuli Kannan, “Largescale multilinshey, “An endtoend languagetracking speech recognizer for gual speech recognition with a streaming endtoend model,” mixedlanguage speech,” in ICASSP, 2018. Google AI Blog, .
M.Grace, M. Bastani, and E.Weinstein, “Occam’sadaptation: A.Waters, N.Gaur, P.Haghani, P.Moreno, and Z.Qu, “Lever A comparison of interpolation of bases adaptation methods for aging language ID in multilingual endtoend speech recognition,” in ASRU, 2019. multidialect acoustic modeling with LSTM s.,” in SLT, 2018.
B. Li, T. Sainath, K. Sim, M. Bacchiani, E. Weinstein, Ngoc Thang Vu, Dau Cheng Lyu, Jochen Weiner, Dominic P. Nguyen, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, and K. Rao, “Multidialect speech Telaar, Tim Schlippe, Fabian Blaicher, Eng Siong Chng, Tanja recognition with a single sequencetosequence model,” in Schultz, and Haizhou Li, “A first speech recognition system ICASSP, 2018.
for Mandarin English codeswitch conversational speech,” in 2012 IEEEI nternational Conferenceon Acoustics, Speechand Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2012, pp. 4889–4892.
J. Emond, B. Ramabhadran, B. Roark, P. Moreno, and M. Ma, “Transliteration based approaches to improve codeswitched speech recognition performance,” in SLT, 2018.
Brij Mohan Lal Srivastava and Sunayana Sitaram, “Homophone identification and merging for codeswitched speech recognition.,” in Interspeech, 2018, pp. 1943–1947.