A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H Review of studies in field of the effects of nanotechnology on breast cancer a*PARISA TEIMOORI BAGHAEE, b ATENA DONYA refers to use very tiny articles (11000 nm) in field of diagnosis and treatment of human cancers causing a new scientific branch in a,b Islamic Azad University Mashhad Branch, Mashhad, Iran oncology under the title of nanooncology . Nanoparticles * Parisa.t have been developed for imaging, showing biomolecules and cancer biomarkers and systemizing drug carrying. Fixing chemotherapy drugs, especially in kind of enzyme in polymer nanoparticles, has led to increase their resistance to heat, p H, Abstract: Cancer is the main cause of mortality at the developed countries and is the second proteases and other destructive factors . Semi Conductor cause of mortality at the developing countries and breast cancer is the most prevalent Fluorescent Nonocrystals such as quantum dots conjugated with malignancy and the first cause of mortality among women of the world. At the US, 28% of antibodies can cause marking determining their exact amount in a new cancer cases and 15% of mortality caused by that in 2010 was caused by breast cancer.
Moreover, breast cancer is the most common cancer among Iranian women, which includes small piece of breast tumor . Other particles in nano scale such 24.4% of overall malignancies and causes 3.3% of mortalities per 1.000 people. The disease as nanocantilerer and nano probes and coupled nanoparticles with is most spread in Tehran and including 25.5% of all cancers. According to the mentioned, specific ligands have been studied in field of cancer tumor imaging the study has tried to assess the effect of nanotechnology in form of a review to diagnose and treat breast cancer. The method applied in this study is descriptive analytical method and determining environmental metastasis . Relevant studies and library method has been used for data collection purpose. In the data collection method, have shown that nanoparticles conjugated with metal core and 45 articles relevant to structure of types of nanoparticles and their uses in diagnosis, super magnetic force with biologic antibodies against imaging and medicine delivery systems and breast cancer treatment have been used.
Although there are still some challenges and limitations to use nanoparticles in medication, gene can simultaneously be useful in imaging and treatment of it is hope that nanoparticles can make wonderful revolution not only in oncology, but also breast cancer . Over the years, advancement of in medication in near future. The most underlying headlines of the present study include nanotechnology has caused use of nanoparticles in different fields mineral nanoparticles, antibodies and tumor imaging methods.
of diseases by using nanoparticles and development of systematic drug delivery methods. Nanoparticles have high potential in field 2 Methodology of diagnosis and treatment of diseases, especially cancer. Using these nanoparticles as factors increasing contrast in conventional For purpose of data collection, databases such as Pubmed and imaging method of magnetic resonance and as nanocarriers in Google Scholar were used. The researches and reviews using Me SH modern drug delivery systems have gained attention of scholars model included malignancy, cancer, neoplasm, nanotechnology, over the years. Systematic transfer of chemotherapy factors to nanoparticles, aptamers, tumor imaging, magnetic nanoparticles, cancer cells using magnetic nanoparticles under in vivo and in situ liposomes, biomarkers, interference small RNA, diagnosis and conditions has been studied and valuable results have been treatment methods of breast cancer using nanoparticles and obtained. Moreover, the nanoparticles are applicable in treatment nanobodies.
of cancer using heating method and transfer of nucleic acids, plasmids and si RNA to cells. Diagnosis of the disease in early 2.1 Types of nanoparticles used in medication stages can be underlying for improvement and treatment methods.
recently, the treatment methods used to diagnose cancer are taken The nanoparticles used in medication field are classified in 2 main usually based on changes in cells and tissues and this can be also groups: particles containing organic molecules as the main structural done by medical clinical examinations and using conventional substance and second group include metals and minerals as central imaging methods. However, scientists tend to diagnose cancer core. Liposomes, dendrimers, carbon nanotubes (CNT s), emulsions, with appearance of the first molecular changes. Iron oxide aptamers, solid lipid nanoparticles, nanobodies and other polymers nanoparticles are currently the only nanomaterials used in clinical have been recognized as organic particles .
medicine as the factor for contradiction in magnetic resonance imaging and as carrier in drug delivery. Experiments taken over 2.2 Liposomes and dendrimers the years on iron oxide nanoparticles show that the particles have no immediate toxic or longterm effect in vivo conditions; Liposomes can be used as chemotherapy drug carrier for different although presence of some nanoparticles, along with nano- human tumors such as breast cancer (figure 1). Dendrimers carriers, can enhance their effect and function on cancer cells. To can be used as contrast factor in MRI and can be the assisting this end, the nanoparticles can reinforce nanocarriers by means of factor to clear pathologic procedures .
different mechanisms such as increased oxidative stress and proper drug accumulation in the cell . Annually, more than 1.1 million cases of breast cancer are being reported and more than 410.000 people die because of breast cancer . There are many treatment methods for breast cancer such as surgery, radiotherapy and hormone therapy, which have lots of complications and disadvantages. For example, tamoxifen used in chemotherapy for treatment of breast cancer can cause cancer in endometrial tissues.
Therefore, it is required to make a system to deliver drug to tumor tissue with zero complications . Using nanoparticles in food industry, electronics and medication is being developed. Preparing particles in nano size (smaller than 100 nm) has increased their levels and has increased their reaction with organic and nonorganic molecules . Using nanotechnology in medication - 1 - A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H targeting and destroying cancer cells, so that it can have lowest effect on healthy cells. One of the main purposes of nanotechnology is carrying drugs on carriers (nanoparticles), sending, and leaving them in target cells, which can be called as systematic drug delivery.
Using magnetic nanoparticles and creating a magnetic field, drug can be delivered to desired tissue intelligently and cause healing in tissue without damaging other tissues . In order to use magnetic nanoparticles in medical uses, those showing super paramagnetic phenomenon in ambient temperature are preferred, since the magnetic property of these particles can be lost in absence of magnetic field and cannot remain. Moreover, existence of magnetic remains in these materials can lead to their coagulation and this can cause blockage of blood in vessels. Therefore, for such uses, using compounds with super paramagnetic property is essential . In general, super paramagnetic property is a kind of magnetic property observed in ferromagnetic small nanoparticles. In sufficiently tiny particles, magnetism can be changed randomly under the effect of temperature. In absence of external magnetic : drugcarrying liposome field, when the time sued to measure magnetism of nanoparticles is significantly longer than rest time, average magnetism of the particles becomes zero and it could be mentioned that particles are 2.3 Aptamers under super paramagnetic conditions (figure 2).
Aptamers are oligonucleotide (RNA or ss DNA) and peptides molecules attached to target molecule (small biomolecules, proteins and even cells) with high tendency and specificity and can be instruments to diagnose and treat diseases such as cancer .
DNA stability of aptamers is higher than RNA; although RNA aptamers have higher flexibility.
Peptide aptamers have been made of a variable peptide loop attached in the end to a protein scaffold. The variable loop includes 1020 amino acids and protein scaffold incudes any kind of protein with high solubility. Moreover, aptamers can be used in drug carrying systems. The aptamers have been bonded to cell surface receptors and have trend to be dragged inside the cell. si RNA s can be used todat as new technique for treatment. Their function is induction of i RNA to regulate special gene expression. Safe, specific and efficient delivery of si RNA s inside the special cells is underlying in field of treatment and medication .
distribution of size of particles should be thin. Magnetic Therefore, Fb part bonded to antigen in conventional antibodies is nanoparticles should have desirable form, size and surface properties limited to a variable domain in HCA b antibodies. As it was to shoot the tumors. For example, in biologic uses and medical mentioned, it includes just heavy chain called HHV. As its size is diagnosis, magnetic nanoparticles can be used without cell toxicity in limit of nano scale (25 nm in diameter and 4 nm in height), they and stable in water and natural p H and human body physiologic are called nanobodies and can be used abundantly in conditions. With taking required modifications on surface of these nanotechnology. Nowadays, monoclonal nanobodies can be compounds, the conditions can be provided to bond the drug, protein produced in bacteria and they are more resistant than conventional and genetic materials (figure 3). Hence, targeted transfer of these antibodies because of their small size, have high solubility and compounds can be achieved with the effect of an external magnetic have high specificity to antigen. Therefore, they have high field .
potential to diagnose and treat cancer .
In the studies conducted by Katrien Van Impe et al on rats, using nanobodies could decrease the metastasis of cancer cells of breast glands in these rats . % of breast cancers, it has been observed that the expression and activity of 2 surface antigens of and was increased . Through making specific nanobodies of the two surface receptors, cancer can be diagnosed and treated.
3. .1 Magnetic nanoparticles, diagnosis and treatment The issue of systematic drug carrying is mostly considered for cancer treatment, since the main challenge in treatment of cancer is - 2 - A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H breast cancer. Conventional method is using blue color or injection of radioisotopes. Today, quantum nanoparticles have been also recommended to determine degree of cancer and for early diagnosis of cancer. The limitation of using quantum particles is because of their toxicity and this method is being developed with reduction of toxic effects of particles .
3.3 Breast cancer treatment with magnetic hyperthermia processes Cancer treatment is one of the most important challenges for medical science and drug delivery. As the conventional treatments such as surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy are not so effective to treat some cancers such as glioblastoma; hyperthermia can be considered as a reliable approach for absolute treatment of these cancers. Cancer treatment by means of inductive irritation of super paramagnetic and biocompatible nanoparticles by means of alternative magnetic field of heating special tissues or organs to : schematic of shell/core structure of temperatures about 4147°C for cancer treatment can be called magnetic nanoparticles and decoration of their surface with hyperthermia (figure 4).
different functional groups.
These particles have been formed of magnetic iron oxide core and a coating of biocompatible materials such as polysaccharides, Dextran, Chitosan, Polyethylene glycol and polyvinyl alcohol.
Functional groups in coating surface of nanoparticles have been used to link the ligands, molecular targeting, transferring nanoparticles to cancer cells and systematic drug delivery and other medical uses such as hyperthermia and magnetic resonance imaging .
3.2 Tumor imaging (diagnosis) Currently, magnetic nanoparticles are being used because of their capability in making contrast in MRI , which has lower toxicity and biologic adaptability . Super paramagnetic nanoparticles (010 nm) can be used as contrast factor in MRI and bismuth nanoparticles can be used as contrast factor for CT. despite to their good absorption, they have nonspecific distribution and are fast in terms of pharmacokinetics. If the surface of the bismuth nanoparticles is covered by polymer, they can be protected from decomposition and the tissues can be protected against their toxic : a schematic of magnetic hyperthermia principles; the effect. The nanoparticles have shown good stability in high principles have been formed based on accumulation of magnetic concentration, they can absorb high range of xray and their survival nanoparticles in tumors compared to healthy tissues time in blood reaches to more than 2 hours. Therefore, the efficiency ratio of these particles to their nontoxicity is better than iodized Hyperthermia process with magnetic ferrofluid suggests possibility materials in imaging . Using quantum particles with infrared of positioning heat. This is because; cancer cells are sensitive to wavelength has been also reported for noninvasive tumor imaging overheat of normal cells. Super paramagnetic nanoparticles can in vivo .
transmit the additional heat to target point through fluctuations of Gao et al covered quantum particles using triplet copolymer magnetic moments inside the nanoparticles. Therefore, solid cancer amphiphilic (polymethacrylate hydrophilic components and two cells will be killed; although normal tissue cells remain under polybutyl acrylate hydrophobic parts and a polyethylene acrylate temperature below 4147°C. Heating potential is highly depended on unit). The polymers protect nanoparticle against decomposition and form and size of particles. Therefore, using singleorganized as they contain polyethylene glycol molecules, they can improve magnetic particles in nano scale is prior to multiorganized particles biologic ability of quantum particles and their intercellular in micro scale. This is because; nanoparticles can tolerate alternative circulation. Conjugation of quantum particles with systematic magnetic field. The produced heat varies depending on frequency, antibodies against membrane specific genes of prostate can mark the magnetic field resonance and time of placement in magnetic field.
human prostate cancer and can decrease the accumulation of Under this conditions, after placement of nanoparticles inside cells quantum particles in liver and bone marrow. Moreover, 3 polymers and placement of body under magnetic field; the particles produce with dimensions of 5.0µm of quantum particles with green, yellow positional and specific heat inside the cancer mass and accelerate and red colors can be observed simultaneously in 3 different parts. destruction of tumor. Hence, hyperthermia can enhance treatment Despite to dextran conjugated with organic colors and influenced in solid cancer .
tumor vessels and expose them to watch transparently; quantum particles mark vascular wall clearly, which can show expression of 3.4 Simultaneous imaging and treatment proteins containing green fluorescent color. Quantum particles link to endothelial sensitive tissue and target the lymph vessels around Nanoparticles conjugated with targeted antibodies are capable to the tumor. Using quantum points with distribution range near the be used simultaneously for diagnosis and treatment of cancer.
infrared have been recommended for tumor imaging. Determination Conjugation of target ligands can be done using Biotin and of lymph nodes can be used to specify degree of melanoma and - 3 - A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H Streptovidine. This method can be used to conjugate an treatment periods can cause unwanted harmful effects. Therefore, antibody to a metal nanoparticle to form a nanoshell . The there are still some challenges and limitations to use nanoparticles in structure of this system is formed of a rounded nanoparticle in medication. It is hope that synthesis costs are reduced in near future dielectric core and silica and surrounded by thin layer of gold. The and pharmacokinetic properties are increased to enhance nanoshell with a transmission spectrum close to infrared convert productivity of nanoparticles and to overcome limitations of using light to thermal energy and takes function for surgery of tumor or them.
removal of tumor using thermal method. the nanoparticles making Because of special magnetic properties, magnetic nanoparticles have heat under the effect of near IR radiation have effective efficiency gained clinical importance for diagnosis and treatment cancer. With to 1 million times higher than colored molecules. The heat created analysis of various studies conducted in this field, it could be found by them is higher than the amount needed to create irreversible that loading anticancer drugs on magnetic nanoparticles can play tissue damage and can cause cell death ultimately. Targeted effective role in enhancement of drug mechanism and removal of nanoshells can be used for irreversible removal of breast tumor in cancer cells. The research results have shown that magnetic vivo conditions. nanoparticles can improve performance of anticancer drugs (Doxorubicin and Sysplatin) in killing cancer cells through 3.5 Breast cancer treatment improvement of production of active oxygen species or other unknown mechanisms. In other words, magnetic nanoparticles can Wide range studies have been taken to use nanoparticles to protect increase cell toxicity of anticancer drug and plays also key role in healthy tissues and to have killing effects on cancer cells. For transfer of drug to tumor cells. Magnetic resonance imaging is a example, Liposomal anthracycline can be used to treat all degrees common method used for diagnosis of tumor and cancer. Using of breast cancer . However, using that is restricted because of magnetic nanoparticles in this method can cause sensitiveness o this toxic effects on heart. The compound, along with Trastuzumab as method for cancer diagnosis, so that cancer can be diagnosed in early a monoclonal antibody against , has better effect . stages and effective treatment measures can be taken for its certain treatment. In addition, special magnetic property of magnetic nanoparticles can be used in targeted drug delivery. The It has been reported that liposome and Epiglottis liposome nanoparticles, especially iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles, can be containing Doxorubicin can be used in treatment of metastatic used as nanocarrier to carry the drug because of capability of breast cancer . Moreover, nanoparticles in core section encapsulation of anticancer drugs and high biocompatibility and low containing paclitaxel and surrounded by albumin can be effective biologic toxicity and high concentration capability in tumor.
to carry hydrophobic molecules in breast cancer. Preclinical Through this, the side effects of the drug can be decreased studies have revealed that paclitaxel contained in nanoparticles significantly. According to the relevant studies and results obtained surrounded by albumin has better power of infiltration in tumor from this study, it could be mentioned that modern drug carrying and compared to conventional paclitaxel. Targeted delivery of multifunctional systems can be designed in near future with high tamoxifen can be taken in all stages of breast cancer. Tamoxifen capability to carry drug to tumor point. In addition, they can be is a Nonsteroidal and antiestrogenic drug with high hydrophobic simultaneously used as contrast factor in magnetic resonance property . Using nanoparticles with the drug can increase its imaging and magnetic hyperthermia process for certain treatment of influence to tumor. Moreover, its toxic effects on healthy tissues cancer.
4 Conclusion As use of conventional diagnosis and imaging methods of tumor In this study, in regard with nanoparticles, the advantages and uses have some disadvantages and limitations; using nanotechnology like of these particles for treatment and diagnosis of breast cancer are quantum nanoparticles, nanobodies and aptamers can be novel discussed. Nanoparticles can be used in medication in field of method for early diagnosis of cancer, especially breast cancer. In diagnosis and treatment of diseases, drug carrying and biologic addition to diagnosis of cancer, aptamers can be effective for cancer imaging. Advancement of nanotechnology in oncology can treatment. Aptamer technology has been developed as a reliable and provide special facilities to identify the various molecular targets effective technology, many studies have been conducted on uses of simultaneously in small tumor samples to take treatment strategy.
aptamers, and the aptamers are being used in different dimensions as Using nanoparticles in the in vivo tumor imaging is being a diagnosis and treatment instrument and drug carrying systems. developed rapidly and targeting antigens relevant to cancer can be However, aptamers have not still found their position in field of possible in future. In near future, nanotechnology science can medical diagnosis and treatment. make wonderful revolution not only in oncology, but also in all Nanoparticles conjugated with antibodies can be used steps of medical sciences.
simultaneously to detect various molecular targets in small tumor Molecular targeting has been studied in field of development and pieces. Moreover, with regard to side effects of anticancer drugs, advancement of tumor selecting factors used in magnetic using safe drug delivery systems with biocompatibility like solid resonance imaging. The factors promise more medical uses.
lipid nanoparticles and liposomes delivering drug to target tissue Macromolecular ligands have gained high attractiveness to be with high specificity is essential. The basis of this method is making used in targeting nanoparticles; although expensiveness of enough amount of drug reach to tumor place for certain time and to synthesis of these ligands and complicated nature of chemistry of reduce harmful effects of drug on other organs. Solid lipid bonding them to magnetic nanoparticles has made some problems nanoparticles can be considered as a complicated system with unique and limitations in regard with using these factors in clinical and advantages and disadvantages, which can separate it from other laboratory phases. Moreover, extension of cation capabilities to colloid systems. Further studies are needed using magnetic- magnetic nanoparticles by peptides influencing in cell can shorten resonance methods to clear drug delivery mechanism using the their residence in plasma and can remove them. Therefore, while system. Limited information is available about toxicity aptamers. using these materials to design platform and to make sure of Therefore, to take aptamer therapy, it is necessary to know toxicity selectiveness of tumor and for Pharmacokinetic preservation, it is level. The main challenge in chemotherapy of cancer is unwanted required to make decisions to adjust cation activity. Any kind of effect and complications of drugs. The single dose or short term of proof on nanoparticles and clearing their functional mechanisms using these drugs can cause serious risks for human health; although can be helpful to design novel anticancer nanocarriers. The nanousing biodegradable particles in nano scale for long term or carriers allow decreased use of cytotoxic drug with their - 4 - A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H mechanism and allow also overcoming resistance of cancer cells 20. Wu X, Liu H, Liu J, Haley KN, Treadway JA, Larson JP, to drug. Bruchez MP. Immunofluorescent labeling of cancer marker and other cellular targets with semiconductor quantum dots. Nature References Biotechnology. 2003;21(1):41–46.
1. Abbasalipourkabir R, Salehzadeh A, Abdullah R. . Lidke DS, Nagy P, Heintzmann R, Arndt Jovin DJ, Post JN, effect of solid lipid nanoparticles Grecco HE, Jovin TM. Quantum dot ligands provide new insights on human breast cancer cell lines. Biotechnology.2011;10(6):528- into erb B/HER receptormediated signal transduction. . Biotechnology. 2004;22(2):198–203.
2. Jain K. Personalised medicine for cancer: from drug development 22. Gao X, Yang L, Petros JA, Marshall FF, Simons JW, Nie S. In into clinical practice. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy. vivo molecular and cellular 2005;6(6):1463– 1476. imaging with quantum dots. Curre Opinion in Biotechnology.
3. Zaboli K. Aliarabi H. Bahari AA. Abbasalipourkabir R. Role of 2005;16(1):63–72.
dietary nanozinc oxide on 23. Medintz IL, Uyeda HT, Goldman ER, Mattoussi H. Quantum dot growth performance and blood levels of mineral: A study on in bioconjugates for imaging, labelling and sensing. Nature Materials.
Iranian Angora (Markhoz) goat kids. Journal of Pharmaceutical and 2005;4(6):435–446.
Health Sciences. 2013;2(1):1926. 24. Hardman R. A toxicologic review of quantum dots: toxicity 4. Jain K. Nanotechnology in clinical laboratory diagnostics. depends on physicochemical and environmental factors.
Clinical Chimica Acta. 2005;358(1- 2):37–54. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2006;114(2):165–172.
5. Ferrari M. Cancer nanotechnology: opportunities and challenges. 25. Doering WE, Nie S. Spectroscopic tags using dyeembedded Nature Reviews ;5(3):161–171. nanoparticles and surfaceenhanced Raman scattering. . Bahreini E, Aghaiypour K, Abbasalipourkabir R, Rezaei Chemistry. 2003;75(22):6171–6176.
Mokarram A, Goodarzi MT, Saidijam M. Preparation and 26. Moore BD, Stevenson L, Watt A, Flitsch S, Turner NJ, Cassidy nanoencapsulation of in chitosan tripolyphosphate nanoparticles C, Graham D. Rapid and ultra- sensitive determination of enzyme and in vitro release study. Nanoscale Research Letters. 2014;9(1):1- activities using surfaceenhanced resonance Raman scattering.
13 Nature Biotechnology. 2004;22(9):1133– 7. Yezhelyev M, Morris C, Gao X, Nie S, Lewis M, .
Multiple profiling of human breast cancer cell lines with quantum 27. Faulds K, Smith WE, Graham D, Lacey RJ. Assessment of silver dots–Ab conjugates. Proceedings of the American Association for and gold substrates for the detection of amphetamine sulfate by Cancer Research. 2005;46:510. surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). . Fortina P, Kricka LJ, Surrey S, Grodzinski P. Nanobiotechnology: 2002;127(2):282–286.
the promise and reality 28. Zhao M, Beauregard DA, Loizou L, Davletov B, Brindle KM.
of new approaches to molecular recognition. Trends in Noninvasive detection of apoptosis using magnetic resonance Biotechnology. 2005;23(4):168–173. imaging and a targeted contrast agent. Nature Medicine.
9. Gao X, Cui Y, Levenson RM, Chung LW, Nie S. In vivo cancer 2001;7(11):1241–1244.
targeting and imaging with semiconductor quantum dots. . Perez OD, Nolan GP. Simultaneous measurement of multiple Biotechnology. 2004;22(8):969–976. active kinase states using polychromatic flow cytometry. . Artemov D, Mori N, Okollie B, Bhujwalla ZM. MR molecular Biotechnology. 2002;20(2):155–162.
imaging of the /neu receptor in breast cancer cells using 30. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Effects of targeted iron oxide nanoparticles. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine. chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer on 2003;49(3):403–408. recurrence and 15 year survival: an overview of the randomized 11. Park J W. Liposomebased drug delivery in breast cancer trials. Lancet. 2005;365:1687–1717.
treatment. Breast Cancer Research. 2002;4(3):95–99. 31. Yezhelyev M, Morris C, Gao X. Simultaneous and quantitative 12. A. J. Cole, V. C. Yang, A. E. David, Trends in biotechnology, detection of multiple biomarkers in human breast cancers using 29 323332 semiconductor multicolor quantum dots breast. Breast . Wesolowski J, Alzogaray V, Reyelt J, Unger M, Juarez K, Research and Treatment. 2005;94(Suppl): S 48.
Urrutia M, Koch Nolte F. Single domain antibodies: promising 32. Giepmans BN, Deerinck TJ, Smarr BL, Jones YZ, Ellisman MH.
experimental and therapeutic tools in infection and immunity. Correlated light and electron microscopic imaging of multiple Medical Microbiology and Immunology.2009;198(3):157–174. endogenous proteinsusing quantum dots. Nature Methods.
14. Hofheinz RD, Gnad Vogt SU, Beyer U, Hochhaus A. ;2(10):743–749.
encapsulated anticancer drugs. Anticancer Drugs. 2005;16(7):691– 33. Al Hajj A, Yezhelyev M, Gao X, O’Regan RM. Simultaneous, 707. quantitative detection of multiple biomarkers in human breast 15. Lee CC, Mac Kay JA, Frechet JM, Szoka FC. Designing cancers using semiconductor multicolor quantum dots. Proceedings dendrimers for biological applications. Nature Biotechnology. of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2006;47:3587.
2005;23(12):1517–1526. 34. Xiao Y, Barker PE. Semiconductor nanocrystal probes for 16. Svenson S, Tomalia DA. Dendrimers in biomedical applications: human metaphase chromosomes. Nucleic Acids Research.
refl ections on the field. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews. 2004;32(3):28.
2005;57(15):2106–2129. 35. Xiao Y, Telford WG, Ball JC, Locascio LE, Barker PE..
17. Hosseini Zijoud SM, Zarei S, Abbasalipourkabir R. Aptamers Semiconductor nanocrystalconjugates, FISH and p H. Nature and their biological & therapeutic applications. Pajouhan Scientific Methods. 2005;2(10):723.
Journal. 2013;12(1):1126. (Persian) 36. Rabin O, Manuel Perez J, Grimm J, Wojtkiewicz G, . Van Impe K, Bethuyne J, Cool S, Impens, F, Ruano Gallego, D, R. An Xray computedtomography imaging agent based on long De Wever O. Gettemans J. A nanobody targeting the Factin capping circulating bismuthsulphide nanoparticles. Nature Materials.
protein Cap G restrains breast cancer metastasis. Breast ;5(2):118–122.
Research. 2013;15(6):R 116. 37. Akerman ME, Chan WC, Laakkonen P, Bhatia SN, Ruoslahti E.
19. Moghimi SM, Rahbarizadeh F, Ahmadvand D, Parhamifar L. Nanocrystal targeting in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy Heavy Chain Only Antibodies: A New Paradigm in Personalized of Sciences. 2002;99(20):12617–12621.
+ Breast Cancer Therapy. Bio ;3(1):14. 38. Kim S, Lim YT, Soltesz EG, De Grand AM, Lee J, Nakayama A, Frangioni JV. Nearinfrared fluorescent type II quantum dots for - 5 - A D A L T A J O U R N A L O F I N T E R D I S C I P L I N A R Y R E S E A R C H sentinel lymph node mapping. Nature Biotechnology.
39. Ciatto S. Sentinel lymph node biopsy: sentinel node techniquehas drawbacks. British Medical Journal.
40. Hirsch LR, Staff ord RJ, Bankson J, Sershen SR, Rivera B, Price RE, West JL. Nanoshellmediated near infrared thermal therapy of tumors under magnetic resonanceguidance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2003;100(23):13549–13554.
41. Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, Gutheil JC, Harris LN, Fehrenbacher L, Press M. Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab as a single agent in firstline treatment of - overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology.
42. Slamon DJ, Leyland Jones B, Shak S, Fuchs H, Paton V, Bajamonde A, Norton L. Use of chemotherapyplus a monoclonal antibody against for metastatic breastcancer that overexpresses . The New England Journal of Medicine.
43. Batist G, Ramakrishman G, Rao CS, Chan drasekharan A, Gutheil J, Guthrie T, Myocet Study Group. Reduced cardiotoxicity and preserved antitumor efficacy of liposomeencapsulated doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide compared with conventional doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in a randomized, multicenter trial of metastatic breast cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2001;19(5):1444–1454.
44. O’Brien ME, Wigler N, Inbar M, Rosso R, Grischke E, Santoro A, Tendler C. Reduced cardiotoxicity and comparable effi cacy in a phase III trial of pegylated liposomal doxo rubicin HCL (Caelyxtm/Doxil R) versus conventional doxorubicin for fi rstline treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Annals of Oncology.
45. Shenoy DB, Amiji MM. Poly(ethylene oxide)-modified poly(epsiloncaprolactone) nanoparticles for targeted delivery of tamoxifen in breast cancer. International Journal of Pharmaceutics.