Title: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Scheduling in Cellular Networks
Authors: Jian Wang, Chen Xu, Yourui Huangfu, Rong Li, Yiqun Ge
Year: 2019
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.05914v2
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.05914v2

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Methodological approach
CONTRIBUTION: Introduces novel approach
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 5
TERMS: method, results, propose, introduce, develop, performance

BODY:
In this paper, we take deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based scheduling as an example to investigate how expert knowledge can help with AI module in cellular networks. A simulation platform, which has considered link adaption, feedback and other practical

mechanisms, is developed to facilitate the investigation. Besides the traditional way, which is learning directly from the environment, for training DRL agent, we propose two novel methods, i.e., learning from a dual AI module and learning from the expert solution.

The results show that, for the considering scheduling problem, DRL training procedure can be improved on both performance and convergence speed by involving the expert knowledge. Hence, instead of replacing

conventional scheduling module in the system, adding a newly introduced AI module, which is capable to interact with the conventional module and provide more flexibility, is a more feasible solution.

Key sentences:
- In
this paper, we take deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based scheduling as an
example to investigate how expert knowledge can help with AI module in cellular
networks.
- A simulation platform, which has considered link adaption, feedback
and other practical mechanisms, is developed to facilitate the investigation.
- Besides the traditional way, which is learning directly from the environment,
for training DRL agent, we propose two novel methods, i.e., learning from a
dual AI module and learning from the expert solution.
- The results show that,
for the considering scheduling problem, DRL training procedure can be improved
on both performance and convergence speed by involving the expert knowledge.
- Hence, instead of replacing conventional scheduling module in the system,
adding a newly introduced AI module, which is capable to interact with the
conventional module and provide more flexibility, is a more feasible solution.

Important terms: method, results, propose, introduce, develop, performance
Focus: Methodological approach
Contribution: Introduces novel approach
