Title: An IoT Framework for Heart Disease Prediction based on MDCNN Classifier
Authors: Mohammad Ayoub Khan
Year: 2020
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05999v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.05999v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Methodological approach
CONTRIBUTION: Introduces novel approach
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 6
TERMS: method, framework, results, propose, deep learning, neural network, prediction, performance, accuracy

BODY:
Internet of Things (IoT) technology has lately been adopted in healthcare systems to collect sensor values for heart disease diagnosis and prediction. Many researchers have focused on the diagnosis of heart disease,

yet the accuracy of the diagnosis results is low. To address this issue, an IoT framework is proposed to evaluate heart disease more accurately using a Modified Deep Convolutional Neural Network (MDCNN).

The performance of the system is analyzed by comparing the proposed MDCNN with existing deep learning neural networks and logistic regression. The results demonstrate that the proposed MDCNN based heart disease

prediction system performs better than other methods. The proposed method shows that for the maximum number of records, the MDCNN achieves an accuracy of 98.2 which is better than existing classifiers.

Key sentences:
- Internet of Things (IoT) technology has lately been adopted
in healthcare systems to collect sensor values for heart disease diagnosis and
prediction.
- Many researchers have focused on the diagnosis of heart disease,
yet the accuracy of the diagnosis results is low.
- To address this issue, an IoT
framework is proposed to evaluate heart disease more accurately using a
Modified Deep Convolutional Neural Network (MDCNN).
- The performance of the system is analyzed
by comparing the proposed MDCNN with existing deep learning neural networks and
logistic regression.
- The results demonstrate that the proposed MDCNN based
heart disease prediction system performs better than other methods.
- The
proposed method shows that for the maximum number of records, the MDCNN
achieves an accuracy of 98.2 which is better than existing classifiers.

Important terms: method, framework, results, propose, deep learning, neural network, prediction, performance, accuracy
Focus: Methodological approach
Contribution: Introduces novel approach
