Title: Cybersecurity of AI medical devices: risks, legislation, and challenges
Authors: Elisabetta Biasin, Erik Kamenjasevic, Kaspar Rosager Ludvigsen
Year: 2023
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03140v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.03140v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Research study
CONTRIBUTION: Presents findings
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 6
TERMS: framework

BODY:
The first part starts by setting the scene where we explain the role of cybersecurity in healthcare. Then, we briefly define what we refer to when we talk about AI that is

considered a medical device by itself or supports one. To illustrate the risks such medical devices pose, we provide three examples: the poisoning of datasets, social engineering, and data or source code extraction.

In the second part, the paper provides an overview of the European Union's regulatory framework relevant for ensuring the cybersecurity of

AI as or in medical devices (MDR, NIS Directive, Cybersecurity Act, GDPR, the AI Act proposal and the NIS 2 Directive

proposal). Finally, the third part of the paper examines possible challenges stemming from the EU regulatory framework. In particular, we look

toward the challenges deriving from the two legislative proposals and their interaction with the existing legislation concerning AI medical devices' cybersecurity.

Key sentences:
- The first
part starts by setting the scene where we explain the role of cybersecurity in
healthcare.
- Then, we briefly define what we refer to when we talk about AI that
is considered a medical device by itself or supports one.
- To illustrate the
risks such medical devices pose, we provide three examples: the poisoning of
datasets, social engineering, and data or source code extraction.
- In the second
part, the paper provides an overview of the European Union's regulatory
framework relevant for ensuring the cybersecurity of AI as or in medical
devices (MDR, NIS Directive, Cybersecurity Act, GDPR, the AI Act proposal and
the NIS 2 Directive proposal).
- Finally, the third part of the paper examines
possible challenges stemming from the EU regulatory framework.
- In particular,
we look toward the challenges deriving from the two legislative proposals and
their interaction with the existing legislation concerning AI medical devices'
cybersecurity.

Important terms: framework
Focus: Research study
Contribution: Presents findings
