Title: Federated Learning for Smart Healthcare: A Survey
Authors: Dinh C. Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pubudu N. Pathirana, Ming Ding, Aruna Seneviratne
Year: 2021
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.08834v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.08834v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Research study
CONTRIBUTION: Presents findings
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 5
TERMS: technique, present, design

BODY:
Traditionally, AI techniques require centralized data collection and processing that may be infeasible in realistic healthcare scenarios due to the high scalability of modern healthcare networks and growing data privacy concerns. Accordingly,

we provide a comprehensive survey on the use of FL in smart healthcare. First, we present the recent advances in FL, the motivations, and the requirements of using FL in smart healthcare.

The recent FL designs for smart healthcare are then discussed, ranging from resource-aware FL, secure and privacy-aware FL to incentive FL and personalized FL. Subsequently, we

provide a state-of-the-art review on the emerging applications of FL in key healthcare domains, including health data management, remote health monitoring, medical imaging, and COVID-19 detection.

Key sentences:
- Traditionally, AI techniques require centralized data collection and processing
that may be infeasible in realistic healthcare scenarios due to the high
scalability of modern healthcare networks and growing data privacy concerns.
- Accordingly, we provide a comprehensive survey on the use of FL in smart
healthcare.
- First, we present the recent advances in FL, the motivations, and
the requirements of using FL in smart healthcare.
- The recent FL designs for
smart healthcare are then discussed, ranging from resource-aware FL, secure and
privacy-aware FL to incentive FL and personalized FL.
- Subsequently, we provide
a state-of-the-art review on the emerging applications of FL in key healthcare
domains, including health data management, remote health monitoring, medical
imaging, and COVID-19 detection.

Important terms: technique, present, design
Focus: Research study
Contribution: Presents findings
