Title: Review of Deep Learning
Authors: Rong Zhang, Weiping Li, Tong Mo
Year: 2018
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.01653v2
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.01653v2

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Research study
CONTRIBUTION: Introduces novel approach
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 7
TERMS: model, deep learning, neural network

BODY:
In recent years, China, the United States and other countries, Google and other high-tech companies have increased investment in artificial intelligence. Deep learning is

one of the current artificial intelligence research's key areas. This paper analyzes and summarizes the latest progress and future research directions of deep learning.

Firstly, three basic models of deep learning are outlined, including multilayer perceptrons, convolutional neural networks, and recurrent neural networks. On this basis, we further analyze the emerging new models of

convolution neural networks and recurrent neural networks. This paper then summarizes deep learning's applications in many areas of artificial intelligence, including speech processing, computer vision, natural language processing and so on.

Finally, this paper discusses the
existing problems of deep learning and gives the corresponding possible
solutions.

Key sentences:
- In recent years, China, the United States and other countries, Google and
other high-tech companies have increased investment in artificial intelligence.
- Deep learning is one of the current artificial intelligence research's key
areas.
- This paper analyzes and summarizes the latest progress and future
research directions of deep learning.
- Firstly, three basic models of deep
learning are outlined, including multilayer perceptrons, convolutional neural
networks, and recurrent neural networks.
- On this basis, we further analyze the
emerging new models of convolution neural networks and recurrent neural
networks.
- This paper then summarizes deep learning's applications in many areas
of artificial intelligence, including speech processing, computer vision,
natural language processing and so on.
- Finally, this paper discusses the
existing problems of deep learning and gives the corresponding possible
solutions.

Important terms: model, deep learning, neural network
Focus: Research study
Contribution: Introduces novel approach
