Title: Review of studies in field of the effects of nanotechnology on breast cancer
Authors: Parisa Teimoori Baghaee, Atena Donya
Year: 2018
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.07494v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1812.07494v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Methodological approach
CONTRIBUTION: Introduces novel approach
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 6
TERMS: method, study, present, develop

BODY:
Cancer is the main cause of mortality at the developed countries and is the second cause of mortality at the developing countries

and breast cancer is the most prevalent malignancy and the first cause of mortality among women of the world. At the US,

28% of new cancer cases and 15% of mortality caused by that in 2010 was caused by breast cancer. According to the

mentioned, the study has tried to assess the effect of nanotechnology in form of a review to diagnose and treat breast cancer.

The method applied in this study is descriptive analytical method and library method has been used for data collection purpose. In the data collection method, 45 articles relevant to structure of types of

nanoparticles and their uses in diagnosis, imaging and medicine delivery systems and breast cancer treatment have been

used. The most underlying headlines of the present study include mineral nanoparticles, antibodies and tumor imaging methods.

Key sentences:
- Cancer is the main cause of mortality at the developed countries and is the
second cause of mortality at the developing countries and breast cancer is the
most prevalent malignancy and the first cause of mortality among women of the
world.
- At the US, 28% of new cancer cases and 15% of mortality caused by that
in 2010 was caused by breast cancer.
- According to the mentioned, the
study has tried to assess the effect of nanotechnology in form of a review to
diagnose and treat breast cancer.
- The method applied in this study is
descriptive analytical method and library method has been used for data
collection purpose.
- In the data collection method, 45 articles relevant to
structure of types of nanoparticles and their uses in diagnosis, imaging and
medicine delivery systems and breast cancer treatment have been used.
- The most underlying
headlines of the present study include mineral nanoparticles, antibodies and
tumor imaging methods.

Important terms: method, study, present, develop
Focus: Methodological approach
Contribution: Introduces novel approach
