Title: Prior Knowledge Injection into Deep Learning Models Predicting Gene Expression from Whole Slide Images
Authors: Max Hallemeesch, Marija Pizurica, Paloma Rabaey, Olivier Gevaert, Thomas Demeester
Year: 2025
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.14056v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2501.14056v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Machine Learning methodology
CONTRIBUTION: Improves existing methods
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 5
TERMS: method, framework, model, study, experiment, findings, design, deep learning, prediction, performance

BODY:
Recent advances in Deep Learning allow to predict molecular information from morphological features within Whole Slide Images (WSIs), offering a cost-effective proxy of the molecular markers. Here we aim to improve existing methods by introducing a

model-agnostic framework that allows to inject prior knowledge on gene-gene interactions into Deep Learning architectures, thereby increasing accuracy and robustness. We design the framework to be generic and flexibly adaptable to a wide range of architectures.

In a case study on breast cancer, our strategy leads to an average increase of 983 significant genes (out of 25,761) across all 18 experiments, with 14 generalizing to an

increase on an independent dataset. Our findings reveal a high potential for injection of prior knowledge to increase gene expression prediction performance from WSIs across a wide range of architectures.

Key sentences:
- Recent advances in Deep Learning allow to
predict molecular information from morphological features within Whole Slide
Images (WSIs), offering a cost-effective proxy of the molecular markers.
- Here we aim to improve existing methods by introducing a
model-agnostic framework that allows to inject prior knowledge on gene-gene
interactions into Deep Learning architectures, thereby increasing accuracy and
robustness.
- We design the framework to be generic and flexibly adaptable to a
wide range of architectures.
- In a case study on breast cancer, our strategy
leads to an average increase of 983 significant genes (out of 25,761) across
all 18 experiments, with 14 generalizing to an increase on an independent
dataset.
- Our findings reveal a high potential for injection of prior knowledge
to increase gene expression prediction performance from WSIs across a wide
range of architectures.

Important terms: method, framework, model, study, experiment, findings, design, deep learning, prediction, performance, accuracy
Focus: Machine Learning methodology
Contribution: Improves existing methods
