Title: Optimizing Memory Efficiency for Convolution Kernels on Kepler GPUs
Authors: Xiaoming Chen, Jianxu Chen, Danny Z. Chen, Xiaobo Sharon Hu
Year: 2017
Paper ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.10591v1
Link: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.10591v1

=== Structured Extractive Summary (used by Ollama) ===
FOCUS: Research study
CONTRIBUTION: Improves existing methods
KEY SENTENCES COUNT: 5
TERMS: model, experiment, introduce, develop, design, implement, deep learning, neural network, performance

BODY:
Recent successes of convolutional neural networks in various deep learning applications put even higher demand on fast convolution. This paper introduces a general model to address the mismatch between the memory bank width

of GPUs and computation data width of threads. Based on this model, we develop two convolution kernels, one for the general case and the other for a special case with one input channel.

By carefully optimizing memory access patterns and computation patterns, we design a communication-optimized kernel for the special case and a communication-reduced kernel for the general case. Experimental data based

on implementations on Kepler GPUs show that our kernels achieve 5.16X and 35.5% average performance improvement over the latest cuDNN library, for the special case and the general case, respectively.

Key sentences:
- Recent successes of
convolutional neural networks in various deep learning applications put even
higher demand on fast convolution.
- This
paper introduces a general model to address the mismatch between the memory
bank width of GPUs and computation data width of threads.
- Based on this model,
we develop two convolution kernels, one for the general case and the other for
a special case with one input channel.
- By carefully optimizing memory access
patterns and computation patterns, we design a communication-optimized kernel
for the special case and a communication-reduced kernel for the general case.
- Experimental data based on implementations on Kepler GPUs show that our kernels
achieve 5.16X and 35.5% average performance improvement over the latest cuDNN
library, for the special case and the general case, respectively.

Important terms: model, experiment, introduce, develop, design, implement, deep learning, neural network, performance
Focus: Research study
Contribution: Improves existing methods
